37Mol. Biol. Evol. 16(1):37±48. 1999
q1999 by the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. ISSN: 0737-4038Median-Joining Networks for Inferring Intraspeci®c Phylogenies
Hans-JuÈrgen Bandelt, Peter Forster, and Arne Ro Èhl
Mathematisches Seminar, Universita Èt Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
Reconstructing phylogenies from intraspeci®c data (such as human mitochondrial DNA variation) is often a chal-
lenging task because of large sample sizes and small genetic distances between individuals. The resulting multitudeof plausible trees is best expressed by a network which displays alternative potential evolutionary paths in the formof cycles. We present a method (``median joining'' [MJ]) for constructing networks from recombination-free pop-ulation data that combines features of Kruskal's algorithm for ®nding minimum spanning trees by favoring shortconnections, and Farris's maximum-parsimony (MP) heuristicalgorithm, whichsequentiallyaddsnewverticescalled``median vectors'', except that our MJ method does not resolve ties. The MJ method is hence closely related to theearlier approach of Foulds, Hendy, and Penny for estimating MP trees but can be adjusted to the level of homoplasyby setting a parameter
«. Unlike our earlier reduced median (RM) network method, MJ is applicable to multistate
characters (e.g., amino acid sequences). An additional feature is the speed of the implemented algorithm: a sampleof 800 worldwide mtDNA hypervariable segment I sequences requires less tha n3ho na Pentium 120 PC. The MJ
method is demonstrated on a Tibetan mitochondrial DNA RFLP data set.
Introduction
The phylogenetic median-joining (MJ) network al-
gorithm which we present here offers new featurescom-pared with our previous reduced median (RM) networkalgorithm (Bandelt et al. 1995) in that it can handlelarg-er sets of genetic data, as well as multistate data suchas amino acid sequences. The MJ method begins withthe minimum spanning trees, all combined within a sin-gle (reticulate) network. Aiming at parsimony, we sub-sequently add a few consensus sequences (i.e., medianvectors, or Steiner points) of three mutually close se-quences at a time. These median vectors can be biolog-ically interpreted as possibly extant unsampled sequenc-es or extinct ancestral sequences. The median operation,also referred to as ``Steinerization'' in mathematics (inwhich the most parsimonious realizations of MP treesare called Steiner trees; see Hwang, Richards, and Win-ter 1992), is basic to all fast MP heuristic algorithms,although it is typically applied in a very restricted(``greedy'') manner in order to arrive at a single tree(Farris 1970). In contrast, the unconstrained use of themedian operation eventually generates the so-called fullquasimedian network (known as the full median net-work in thecase ofbinarydata),whichnormallyharborsall optimal trees, as well as numerous suboptimal trees.This quasimedian network is in general too complex forvisualization or even too large for storage in a computer.With MJ, we take care that at each stage only thosemedian vectors which have a good chance of appearingas branching nodes in an MP tree are generated by con-sidering only triplets of sequences for which one se-quence is linked to the other two in the network underprocessing. An additional ranking of these candidatetriplets according to a distance score (as proposed byTateno 1990) allows further re®nement of the triplet se-
Key words: phylogeny construction, networks, parsimony,human
mitochondrial DNA.
Address for correspondence and reprints: Hans-Ju Èrgen Bandelt,
Mathematisches Seminar, Universita Èt Hamburg, Bundesstrasse 55, D-
20146 Hamburg, Germany.lection. After each round of median generation, the pro-
cess restarts with the thus enlarged set of sequences.
This approach, then, is quite similar to that of
Foulds, Hendy, and Penny (1979), which, unfortunately,seems to have been rather forgotten in the ®eld of bi-ology after tree-building program packages becamewidely available. The major differencesbetweenthetwomethods are as follows: the criterion of selecting tripletsfor median generation is different;MJ stopsearlier(witha postprocessing phase being optional, see below); andMJ is more generous and ¯exible in that it uses an ex-plicit parameter,
«, fuzzifying the employed distance
measure, with the effect that by increasing «, MJ pro-
duces more median vectors simultaneously at eachstage. In the illustrative example using Tibetan mtDNA,we compare the different network methods and showhow the network analysis guides the informed choice ofa single tree estimate in this particular case.
Minimum Spanning Networks
A minimum spanning tree for a set of sequence
types connects all given types without creating any cy-cles or inferring additional (ancestral) nodes, such thatthe totallength (i.e.,thesumofdistancesbetweenlinkedsequence types) is minimal. Kruskal's (1956) algorithmquickly ®nds one minimum spanning tree: in a prelim-inary step the pairs of sequence types are listed in in-creasing order of their distances (ordering of the pairswith the same distance is arbitrary and serves as a tie-breaking rule); then, the tree is built up by successivelyselecting the ®rst link from the preference list whichdoes not create a cycle together with the already chosenlinks.
A simple modi®cation of this algorithm (namely,
dropping the tie-breaking rule), allows one to constructthe union of all minimum spanning trees, which we willcall (by a slight abuse of language) the minimum span-ning network. (This construction is completely analo-gous to that proposed by Excof®er and Smouse [1994],who constructed this network by departing from the al-gorithm ofPrim [1957]).Assumethatthereare kdistinct
distance values,
d1,d2,...,dk, between the se-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


38 Bandelt et al.
FIG. 1.ÐMinimum spanning network displaying the mitochon-
drialND3variation in 61 Africans, Asians, and Europeans (data from
Nachman et al. 1996, table 1). This one-step network is identical tothe MJ and RM networks and contains all 15 MP trees. Circles(nodes)represent sequence types, numbered from 1 to 14; areasof (andwithin)circles are proportional to the number of sampled individuals. Transi-tions are referred to by the nucleotide positions (numbered as in An-derson et al. 1981); parallel lines in a reticulation represent mutationsat identical nucleotide positions and are thus labeled only once; su-perscript refers to transversions. Sequence type 1 represents the Cam-bridge reference sequence. At the right of the ®gure, gains and losses(represented by arrows) of restriction sites 10394 DdeI and 10397 AluI
are explained. There is a single candidate for a most likely tree (in-dicated by unbroken lines) when geographicalinformationistakenintoaccount. First, it is likely that the link between type 8 (African) andtype 14 (European) can be dropped, as suggested by Nachman et al.(1996). Second, the African mtDNA tree of Chen et al.(1995)includesseveral restriction sites within ND3, which indicates that sequence
types 7 and 10 from Nachman et al. (1996) occur among the Biaka(West Pygmies), and thus favors the paths from type 2 to type 1 andfrom type 2 via type 7 to type 10. The branching and frequencypatternof the resulting ND3tree suggests that sequence type 2 is the root of
the tree.
FIG. 2.ÐThe median vector Xof binary sequences U, V,andW.
quences under consideration. We proceed in increasing
order of these values. At the beginning, no pair of se-quence types is linked. For the recursive step, assumethat the next value to be processed is
di, and the network
constructed so far is not yet connected, that is, it com-prises several connected subnetworks (its components).Then, add links between all sequence types from differ-ent connected components that are at distance
di.I ft h e
resulting network is connected, the algorithm stops; ifnot, it continues with the next value,
di11. The proof that
the minimum spanning network is constructed in thisway is deferred to appendix 1. Easy to compute, theminimum spanning network is of little direct use forrepresenting genetic data, since in general a minimumspanning tree is far from being most parsimonious. It
serves, however, as a good point of departure in eachrecursive step of our MJ network construction for gen-erating additional inferred sequence types which reduce
tree length.
There are, however, rare cases in which the mini-
mum spanning network is a connected one-step networkand therefore provably contains all MP trees. In such acase, the connected network consists of exactly thoselinks between sequence types which differ in only onecharacter (e.g., nucleotide position or restriction site).This case can arise when the resolution of the employedcharacters is fairly low and the sampling of the popu-lation is suf®ciently exhaustive; for example, the humanND3data set published by Nachman et al. (1996) can
be represented by a connected one-step network (®g. 1).This network has two cycles sharing a link which giverise to 15 MP trees (rather than 27, as claimed in Nach-man et al. 1996).
We can conceive of obtaining the minimum span-
ning network by departing from the complete networkin which any two sequence types are connected by alink with a length equal to the respective distance andthen deleting links sequentially as follows: First, orderthe links from maximal to minimal length. Processinglinks in this order, check for each step whether the linkunder consideration joins two nodes which are connect-ed by a path comprising only shorter links; wheneverthis is the case, the processed link is deleted. This pro-cedure may be shortened in updating a network. Forexample, if a minimum spanning network is enlarged byadding a single node with incident links, then one needsto screen only the subnetwork formed by the new cyclescontaining the added node (cf. Foulds, Hendy, and Pen-ny 1979).
Median Vectors and Quasimedian Networks
For three aligned sequences, U, V,andW,there is
just one tree (the ``star'') connecting them. If all char-acters corresponding to the sequence positions are bi-nary, then this tree has a single most parsimonious re-construction (MPR; see Swofford et al. 1996); namely,the sequence thatisassignedtotheinteriornodeinorderto realize minimum tree length is necessarily the medianvectorXobtained by majority consensus (®g. 2). If,
however, mof the characters have three different states
inU, V,andW,then there exist 3
mdistinct MPRs. Three
of them are distinguished by minimizing the length ofone link (at the expense of the two others); for instance,the sequence assigned to the interior node in an MPRDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


Median-Joining Networks 39
FIG. 3.ÐThe median vectors X, Y,andZof sequences U, V,andW.
which is closest to Uis sequence X,where for eachtwo-
state character, the majority state is taken, and for eachthree-state character, the state of Uis taken. Similarly,
sequences YandZwhich minimize the distances to V
andW,respectively, are de®ned (see ®g. 3 for an ex-
ample). The three sequences X, Y,andZare called the
``median vectors'' of U, V,andW.The network com-
posed of the equilateral triangle with nodes X, Y,andZ
and three further links joining it with the sampled se-quencesU, V,andWthen represents the distances be-
tweenU, V,andW.
Given any sample comprising nsequences, one
may successively add median vectors as follows: Ateach step, select any three sequences U, V,andWfrom
the pool of sequences sampled or created so far, and addthe median vector(s) of U, V,andWto the pool. Con-
tinue until no further new sequences can be generated.The terminal pool of sequences can be organized as anetwork in which two sequences UandVare linked
exactly when there is no third sequence Xbetween them
(i.e.,Xis the median vector of U, V,andX). This net-
work is called the (full) quasimedian network generatedby the sampled sequences. When all characters are bi-nary, this network coincides with the (full) median net-work described by Bandelt et al. (1995). Mathematicalproperties of quasimedian networks have been studiedand surveyed by Bandelt, Mulder, and Wilkeit (1994).In practice, the quasimedian network generated by thegiven data may be somewhat large due to homoplasy,such that only a portion should be heuristically con-structed by carefully selecting triplets of sequences formedian generation.
Median Joining
Prerequisites
The input data for our network algorithm comprise
correctly aligned sequences of a population sample. Itis stipulated that ambiguous states are infrequent andrecombination is absent. These requirements are met forpublished human mtDNA RFLP and control region se-quences as well as Y-chromosomal short tandem repeatvariation when a single-repeat mutation model is as-sumed.
Distances
The simplest way to obtain a distance measure be-
tween two sequences is to count the number of characterdifferences (the ``Hamming distance''). As a re®nement,
we may also weight character changes, albeit only in asymmetrical fashion (i.e., giving both directions ofchange between two states the same weight). The``weighted'' Hamming distance between two sequencetypes is then the sum of weighted differences.
Ambiguous States
Prior to network construction, missing or ambigu-
ous states in the sample are treated in the calculation ofdistances as follows. An ambiguous state Xis equated
with the set of states that specify this ambiguous state.For instance, X
5R (purine) would be equated with the
{A, G} pair of nucleotides, whereas X5N would mean
the set of all nucleotides, {A, G, C, T}. The weighteddistance between such sets of character states is equatedwith the minimum (weighted) difference between thestates from those sets; for example, in the unweightedcase, the difference between R and N is 0, but that be-tween R and T (thymine) is 1. Ambiguities in the char-acter string of a sequence type are then speci®ed at theinitial stage of the network construction, which is greed-ily realized by comparing the ambiguous states in eachsequence with the de®nite states of the other minimallydistant sequences (with respect to the above distancemeasure). An ambiguous state will be assigned to the
setting of the most common de®nite state of these se-quences (ties being broken arbitrarily).
The Algorithm
For the algorithm, we specify a tolerance
«up to
which we wish not to distinguish between distances. In-creasing the parameter
«widens the search for potential
new median vectors (incurred by the choice of links instep 2, below) and also relaxes a distance criterion (step4). (One could replace the single parameter
«by a pair
of parameters governing the two steps separately, butwe choose not to do this here.) At each stage, the al-gorithm constructs an initial part of the minimum span-ning network (described by the ``feasible'' links) for thecurrent sequence types (i.e., sequence types under pro-cessing), or, in the case in which
«is set .0, the `` «-
relaxed'' minimum spanning network, which containsadditional feasible links (step 2). Triplets of sequencetypes are admitted to median generation only if thereare at least two feasible links among them, but onlythose median vectors are actually generated and addedto the current pool of sequence types for which the totaldistance to the corresponding triplet attains the mini-mum value plus
«at most (step 4). The whole process
is iterated until no further median vectors can be gen-erated following these rules. Some intermediate purgingof obsolete sequence types may be necessary (step 3).The ®nal network is then the minimum spanning net-work of the expanded set of sequence types (step 5).
Phase I: Successive selection of median vectors.
Initialization: Specify
«$0.Thecurrentsequencetypes
comprise the sampled sequence types.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


40 Bandelt et al.
Table 1
Four Sequence Types, A, B, C, andD,De®ned by Five
Weighted Binary Characters
SEQUENCE
TYPE CHARACTERSDISTANCES
ABCD
A........
B........
C........
D........
Weights ...00000
1100010110011011321244
67
57Step 1:Determine the distance matrix dfor the current
sequence types, pool identical sequence types, and orderthe different distance values as
d1,d2,...,dk.
Step 2:Determine the links between sequence types
which describe the ( «-relaxed) minimum spanning net-
work, i.e., which are feasible with regard to «in the
following sense: two sequence types VandWare fea-
sibly linked if there is no path from VtoWconsisting
of sequence types V5U0,U1,...,Uk5Wwhich ful®l
the inequality d(Ui,Ui11),d(V, W)2«for alli50,
...,k21. Thus, VandWwithd(V, W)5djform a
feasible link if either dj2« #d1orVandWbelong
to different connected components of the ``threshold''subnetwork in which sequence types are linked exactlywhen their distance does not exceed
di, whereiis the
largest index with di,dj2«.
Step 3:Iteratively remove from the set of current se-
quence types those (obsolete) sequence types which arenot among thesampledsequencesbutarefeasiblylinkedto at most two current sequence types. If obsolete typeswere detected, go back to step 2; else continue.
Step 4:Determine the feasible triplets U, V,andWof
sequence types, which are de®ned as follows: at leasttwo pairs from U, V,andWare feasibly linked, and at
least one median vector XofU, V,andWis not yet a
current sequence type. If there are no feasible triplets atall, then continue with step 5. Otherwise, compute theconnection cost d(U, X)
1d(V, X)1d(W, X)o ft h e
median vectors Xfor each feasible triplet U, V,andW.
This value constitutes the length of MP trees connectingU, V,andW.Compute the minimum connection cost
l
for all feasible triplets U, V,andW.Now, generate all
median vectors Xof feasible triplets for which the con-
nection costs do not exceed l1«. Expand the set of
current sequence types with these new median vectors.Go back to step 1.
Phase II: Construction of the ®nal network.
Step 5:Calculate the minimum spanning network for
the new set of current sequence types. This can be ac-complished by performing a pass through step 3 withparameter
«set to zero (so that only minimum length
connections are taken into account); then, the feasiblelinks with regard to
«50 yield the minimum spanning
network. If obsolete median vectors are present, removethese and repeat step 5. If not, these feasible links de-scribe the ®nal network.
The construction ensures that every link between
two sequence types VandWin the ®nal network has
the same length as any shortest path between VandW
in the sequence space endowed with the (weighted)Hamming distance. The segment bounded by VandW
in this space consists of all possible sequences Zbe-
tweenVandW,that is, lying on shortest paths between
VandWin the space or, equivalently, satisfying d(V, Z)
1d(W, Z)5d(V, W). Two segments in the sequence
space bounded by pairs V, WandX, Yof sequence types
that are linked in the ®nal network never intersectwhen-everVandWare distinct from XandY,that is, there isno possible sequence type Zbetween VandWas well
as between XandY(see appendix 2 for a proof). We
can therefore select any of the shortest paths from thesequence space in order to connect linked sequencetypes without creating any internal node twice. Asimpleconsequence of this observation is that for binary datafree of homoplasy, the unique most parsimonious treerepresenting them is reconstructed by this networkmethod.
Illustrations
Example 1
In order to show the MJ algorithm at work, we
consider an arti®cial data set consisting of foursequencetypes,A, B, C, andD,de®ned by ®ve weighted binary
characters (see table 1, which also displays the weightedHamming distances). There are four different distanceswithin the initial data set:
d154,d255,d356, and
d457. We now determine the d-step components, that
is, the connected components of the subnetwork inwhich pairs of sequences are linked when their distancedoes not exceed
d, for each choice of dfrom d1,d2, and
d3.A t d5d 154, we can link sequence Ato both
sequence Band sequence C,thus obtaining the twofour-
step components { A, B, C} and {D}. At d55, we can
also link sequences BandDso that a single ®ve-step
component { A, B, C, D } arises, thus ending the search
ford-step components. Therefore, the three pairs A, B
andA, CandB, Dare feasibly linked for every choice
of«. Thus,A, B, CandA, B, Dconstitute feasible trip-
lets, from which median vectors U510000 and V5
01000 can be generated at connection costs 7 and 8.
Now, the process depends on the actual setting of theparameter
«.
We begin with «50. Then, only the medianvector
Uis generated at minimum cost l57 in the ®rst round.
The distances from UtoA, B, C, and D equal 1, 3, 3,
and 8, respectively. The new distance values of the ex-panded set of sequences are thus
d151,d253,d35
4,d455,d556,d657, and d758. The one-step
components are { A, U}, {B}, {C}, and {D}, and the
three-step components are { A, B, C, U } and {D}, which
are also the four-step components. These are thenmerged into the single ®ve-step component. We thushave feasible links from AtoU, BtoD, BtoU,andC
toU.Notice that the pairs A, BandA, Care not joined
by a feasible link because they are at distance 4 fromeach other and belong to a common
d-step componentDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


Median-Joining Networks 41
FIG. 4.ÐMJ networks (drawn to scale) constructed from the data
of table 1 with three differentsettings( a±c)oftheparameter «;inferred
sequence types U, V, W, X, Y, andZare added to the growing network
as median vectors.Table 2
Six Sequence Types, A1,A2,B1,B2,C,andD,De®ned by
Six Binary Characters and One Ternary Character
SEQUENCE
TYPES CHARACTERSDISTANCES
A1A2B1B2CD
A1.......
A2.......
B1.......
B2.......
C.......
D.......
Weights ..G
AAAAA
1A
GAAAA
2A
AGAAA
1A
AAGAA
2A
AAAAG
2A
AAAGG
2A
AGG
C
A
234
55
635
6565
6784
atd,4. Obtaining no further feasible links, the algo-
rithm stops (as triplets A, B, UandA, C, UandB, C,
UandB, D, Ugenerate only median vectors which are
among the current sequence types). The former feasiblelinks yield a connected network which describes an MPtree.
Setting the parameter
«to 1, the starting situation
is exactly the same as with «50, except that we must
now check all pairs of sequences which do not exceeddistance 5
1«56 for feasible linkage. Pair B, Cmust
be checked also, but it does not constitute an additionalfeasible link, since sequences BandCbelong to a com-
mon
d-step component at d,62«55. We then
obtain the same feasible links, feasible triplets, and min-imum value for
las for «50. Now, we have to gen-
erate all median vectors of feasible triplets not exceed-ing connection cost l1«5 71158. Thus, for «5
1, both median vectors UandVare generated. The dis-
tances from VtoA, B, C, D, andUequal 3, 1, 7, 4, and
4, respectively. The one-step components are now { A,
U}, {B, V}, {C}, and {D}; the three-step components
are {A, B, C, U, V } and {D}; and for d$4, all six
sequences are within one d-step component { A, B, C, D,
U, V}. In the current set of six sequence types, feasible
links connect A, B, U, andVamong each other; fur-
thermore, they connect CtoAandUas well as DtoB
andV.Since no feasible triplets arise, the algorithm ter-
minates with the network of ®gure 4 b.
The ®nal setting, «52, will eventually yield the
full median network generated by the data matrix, thusdisplaying the full homoplasy of this data set. At theoutset, all links between the given sequence types arefeasible. Then, all triplets are feasible. The median vec-torsU, V, W (00100), and X(11100) are generated at
connection costs not exceeding 7
1259. In the ex-
panded set of sequence types, the triplets C, U, W and
D, V, X are feasible, producing median vectors Y
(10100) and Z(01100) at connection costs 4 and 5, re-
spectively. The resulting 10 sequence types yield the®nal network shown in ®gure 4 c.This constitutes a me-
dian network, since the median vectors for all 120 trip-lets of distinct sequence types are already found amongthe 10 sequence types.
Example 2
To demonstrate the MJ method with multistate
characters, consider the following arti®cial datasetcom-prising six sequences, A
1,A2,B1,B2,C,andD,with
seven weighted positions (see table 2). These sequencesgenerate the quasimedian network displayed in ®gure 5,in which the prism signi®es the incompatibility of thesingle ternary character with one binary character. MJwith
«52 or larger retrievesthis network.Whensetting
«51 instead, three median vectors are generated in the
®rst round: Vfrom the triplet A1,A2,B1, andWfrom
A1,B1,B2, both at connection cost 6, as well as Xfrom
A1,C, Dat cost 7; no further median vectors are gen-
erated, so MJ terminates with the unique MP tree forthese data. In contrast, MJ with
«50 ®rst generates V
andW,and then, in the second round, it adds both X
andYat connection cost 6. We thus have the seemingly
paradoxical situation (although it is rarely seen with realdata) that the MJ network may shrink when passingfrom
«50t o«51.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


42 Bandelt et al.
FIG. 5.ÐMJ network with «52 constructed from the data of
table 2. The unique MP tree is indicated with bold lines and coincideswith the MJ network for
«51. Unbroken lines constitute the MJ
network for «50.
Comparison with the Method of Foulds, Hendy, and
Penny (1979)
The approach taken by Foulds, Hendy, and Penny
(1979) to exactly determine the MP trees for data sets(of small size) entails a heuristic networkmethod,whichis comparable to our MJ algorithm with parameter
«5
0, albeit with some differences. Steps 1 and 2 are per-formed the same, whereas step 3 (elimination of obso-lete sequence types) is not explicitly mentioned by thoseauthors but would clearly ®t their strategy. The selectionof median vectors in step 4 to be added to the growingnetwork is quite different. To describe this, considerpairsU, VandU, Wof feasibly linked sequence types
such that the median vector X(for the triplet U, V, W)
nearest to Uis different from U(as in ®gs. 2 and 3);
say thatXis within the search radius max( d(U, V),d(U,
W)) and yields the positive pro®t d(U, X). Now, create
those median vectors X,maximizing the pro®t within
the smallest possible search radius in which new medianvectors would arise, expand the set of current sequencetypes by these created median vectors, and otherwiseproceed with step 5 of MJ. We refer to the resultingnetwork as the ``greedy FHP network'' (prior to furtherprocessing).
The complete approach of Foulds, Hendy, and Pen-
ny (1979) is somewhat dif®cult to compare with the MJalgorithm for
«50, since the former employs the ex-
plicit comparison of the length of the shortest trees con-necting the sampled sequences within the network witha calculated lower bound for the length of MP trees.This comparison, however, cannot effectively be real-ized for very large data sets. We deliberately interprettheir approach as consisting of two phases: an initialphase, essentially yielding the greedy FHP network, anda ®nal phase at which the network may further grow inorder to capture additional putative MPRs. Speci®cally,each pair U, Vof sampled sequences for which the
length of a shortest path in the current network exceedsthe input distance is processed separately: add an arti-®cial feasible link between UandV,and seek to create
new median vectors by reiterating the previous phase.By way of illustration, consider the greedy FHPnetworkin example 1, given by the MP tree of ®gure 4 a.In this
tree, the pairs A, DandC, Ddo not have their input
distances realized because of homoplasy. When execut-ingA, D®rst, we would create the extra link between
AandDand thereby force the triplet A, B, Dto become
feasible, from which Vis obtained as a median vector.
This leads to the network shown in ®gure 4 b.Introduc-
ing the extra link between CandDto this networkgives
rise to the feasible triplets C, D, U andC, D, V, from
whichYandZare generated as median vectors. Both
vectors, however, are subsequently removed as beingobsolete, at which point the procedure terminates. Onthe other hand, when executing the pair C, DbeforeA,
D,the forced link between CandDyields the feasible
tripletsC, D, U andB, C, D, from which YandXare
now generated. The two median vectors become linkedin the minimum spanning network for A, B, C, D, U, X,
andYand thus survive the purging of obsolete sequenc-
es. The pair A, Dthen still needs treatment: adding an
extra link between AandDproduces the median vector
ZfromA, D, X, which, however, remains obsolete and
is removed. We thus see that one may obtain differentnetworks in the ®nal phase, depending on the order inwhich the pairs are processed. Even if we took the sub-network comprising all temporarily constructed se-quencesV, X, Y,andZtogether with A, B, C, D, andU,
we would still dismiss those most-parsimonious recon-structions which include the node W.
Case Study
The effectiveness of network analyses (along with
appropriate weighting) for re®ning our understanding ofhuman mtDNA evolution will now be demonstratedwith the Tibetan RFLP data from Torroni et al. (1994).Variation at the two restriction sites 10394 DdeI and
10397AluI in the human mitochondrial genome de®nes
the deepest currently known phylogenetic split withinnon-AfricanmtDNA,distinguishingsupergroupM(bothsites present; rare in Europeans but frequent in Asians)from the other supergroup (both sites absent; frequentin both Europeans and Asians). However, because thetwo recognition sites overlap, it is conceivable that amutation in the overlap of the two sites may occasion-ally cause a secondary loss of both sites. This occur-rence has already been postulated by Torroni et al.(1993) and can now be con®rmed with the ND3data
from Nachman et al. (1996) (see ®g. 1; the double lossis induced by a mutation at nucleotide position [np]10397). Two out of ®ve Eurasians with T at np 10400(characterizing the supergroup M; see Torroni et al.1996) have the np 10397 mutation, which indicates thatsequencing of np's 10397, 10398, and 10400 (cf. ®g. 1)rather than RFLP analysis is required to identify Mmembership reliably.
Single-hit losses of the overlapping sites
10394DdeI/10397AluI would be most disturbing for
phylogenetic analyses of Asian mtDNA RFLP data ifwe did not downweight these sites. In the Tibetan RFLPDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


Median-Joining Networks 43
data from Torroni et al. (1994), which we reanalyze ig-
noring the unreliable site 16517 HaeIII (Chen et al.
1995), no MP tree exists which would recognize thisdouble loss as one event in sequence types 131 and 135within mtDNA group D. There are, however, such MPtrees once sites 10394 DdeI and 10397 AluI are each
weighted by 1/2; employing this weighting, the greedyFHP network comprises exactly the 4
343155240
different most-parsimonious realizations of all MP treesfor this data. MJ with
«50 offers one additional me-
dian vector, namely that for the triplet 146, 147, 62,along with three additional links (dotted in ®g. 6). TheRM network, in contrast, does not incorporate all MPtrees, as a result of the hypothesis of a parallel event at5259AvaII/5261HaeIII rather than at 12406 HpaI/HincII.
The MJ network with
«set to 1 (not shown) would
embrace this alternative as well.
A most plausible MP solution (highlighted in ®g.
6) is obtained by taking into account mtDNA type fre-quencies and downweighting highly mutable sites: dou-ble losses of sites 10394 DdeI/10397AluI arequitelikely,
and all MP trees suggest that both 15925 HpaII and
1667DdeI/1670AluI have experienced at least two in-
dependent mutations. This tree agrees quite well withthe tree presented by Torroni et al. (1994), even thoughthey incorporated the unstable site 16517 HaeIII in their
analysis. Note that, departing from our tree, it requiresno fewer than six mutations to explain the distributionof site 16517 HaeIII,whereasallothersitesareestimated
to have experienced three or fewer mutations (see alsoForster et al. 1997). A notable improvement to the treepresented by Torroni et al. (1994) is our proposed phy-logeny for mtDNA group F, which suggests that16303RsaI (corresponding to np 16304) is a useful con-
trol region marker for group F.
Setting of the Parameter
«
Generalizing from the Tibetan case study and oth-
ers not recorded here, we recommend running MJ with
«50 for human mtDNA RFLP data, provided that no-
toriously noisy sites in the control region (e.g.,16310RsaI, 16517HaeIII) are downweighted. In any
case, postprocessing (described below)is encouraged,asis a trial with
«51 to explore the homoplasy of the
data. For the more homoplasious human mtDNAcontrolregion sequences, differential weighting of sites is evenmore important, and it is advisable to compare the
«5
0 network with the «51 network, to employ only fre-
quent sequence types, or even to resort to a hybrid ap-proach (see below). In general, the longer the maximumlength of links and the sparser the sampling, the higherthe setting of
«should be. These recommendations are
valid for a data set with a weight of 1 for most char-acters. For example, a choice of
«54 has the same
effect as «50 if all weights of characters are multiples
of 5. Therefore, increments of «are only effective when
scaled to increments in the distancematrix ofsequences.
Implementation
Data Reduction
In view of the time the algorithm will take to cal-
culate the network, it is advisable to reduce the data setto a minimum. It is routine to ®rst group identical se-
quences into sequence types for which the sample fre-quency is recorded. Moreover, all sequence positionswhich are unvaried in the data set are eliminated. Sec-ond, we can take a look ahead and predict which small``peripheral'' one-step subnetworks (such as pendantone-step subtrees) will inevitably show up in the result-ing MJ network, no matter how the parameter
«is cho-
sen. These peripheral subnetworks can be constructedseparately, so that the algorithm will run on a smallerdata set, producing a smaller MJ network to which theseparately erected ``extremities'' are attached later. Forinstance, every sequence type linked to exactly one oth-er sequence type in the full quasimedian network maybe eliminated. To identify such a type Zin the data set,
we check whether there exists some type Wsuch that
the characters distinguishing ZfromWare binary (un-
informative) characters for which all sequence types dif-ferent from Zshare the same state. We then remove Z
from the further-processed sample of types and continuethe search. Moreover, we will erase any four-cycle ofsampled sequences, which would be peripheral in thefull quasimedian network, by deleting its linked pair oftypes not linked to any type outside of this four-cycle.To this end, we check whether there exist four sequencetypesW, X, Y, andZ,distinguished by only two binary
characters,
aandv, such that YandZhave one state
with respect to v, and all remaining types (in the pro-
cessed sample) have the other state, while adistinguish-
esW, ZfromX, Y.Then,W, X, Y, andZform a pe-
ripheral four-cycle attached to the linked types Wand
X; remove YandZfrom the processed sample, and con-
tinue until no further peeling is possible. Note that thecalculation of median vectors in the processed samplefor the algorithm is not affected by the removal of theseperipheral parts. All eliminated sequences are,ofcourse,resurrected in the ®nal network display.
Running Times
We have implemented the MJ algorithm with the
data reduction as described, accepting character weightsand any choice of
«. The program Network 1.5 (Ro Èhl
1997) accepts up to 9,000 different sequences distin-guished at up to 252 characters. The resulting networkis graphically displayed and is also described by a listof links.
To demonstrate the ef®ciency of the MJ method,
we tested a worldwide sample comprising 2,055 humanmtDNA control region sequences (hypervariable seg-ment I, with 199 varied positions). After pooling iden-tical sequences, there are 1,272 different sequences inthis sample. The data reduction further eliminates 14sequences and 14 positions before executing the corealgorithm. Positions are weighted uniformly and the pa-rameter
«is set to 0. The algorithm takes 25 rounds for
median generation. The ®nal network has 548 medianvectors (which are not among the sampled sequences).The running time on a personal computer (IBM Cyrix6X86 150
1, similar in speed to a Pentium 120) was 26
h and 21 min. If we limit the reduction process to thepooling of identical sequences (so that we have 1,272Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


44 Bandelt et al.
FIG. 6.ÐMJ network ( «50) for Tibetans, based on mtDNA restriction sites (Torroni et al. 1994; sites 10394 DdeI and 10397 AluI are
weighted 1/2; site 16517 HaeIII is disregarded, but its presence is indicated by `` 1'' accompanying the sequence types; an error in the original
table concerning the status of 10394 DdeI/10397AluI in mtDNA type 118 has been corrected). Designation of sequence types, restriction sites,
and mtDNA groups A to G accords with Torroni et al (1994). A slash indicates that a site is recognized by more than one restriction enzyme,and underlining denotes resolved recurrent mutations. Arrows point to presence of restriction sites; areas of circles are proportional to thenumbers of sampled individuals. The dotted links do not appear in any MP trees; the unbroken links indicate a plausible MP tree (see text).Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


Median-Joining Networks 45
Table 3
Results with Data Reduction for Sequences RandomlyDrawn from 2,055 mtDNA Control Region Sequences(hypervariable segment I)
Number
of Input
SequencesNumber of
Eliminated SequencesRunning Time for
Data Reduction (s)
300 .........350 .........400 .........450 .........500 .........550 .........600 .........650 .........700 .........750 .........800 .........67
79
10610312415016619228923322934
4551578280
101155137219183
Table 4
Results for the MJ Algorithm Applied to the ReducedData Sets of Table 3
Number
of Input
SequencesNumber of
Varied PositionsNumber of
Generated
Median VectorsRunning Time
(s)
223......271......294......347......376......400......434......458......511......517......571......128
120127137130143145144152146153144
138195182232181207230238195260943
1,5871,2403,2214,6524,5086,3617,1938,8127,833
10,420
different sequences of length 199), then we get a run-
ning time of 28 hÐan increase of 6.3%. In contrast, thedata reduction takes only 0.7% of the total running time.It thus pays to perform the reduction.
To obtain a rough estimate of the average com-
plexity of the algorithm, we randomly drew 300±800sequences from the above data set and subjected themto the algorithm. Table 3 lists the numbers of sequencesemployed, along with the numbers of varied sequencepositions, the numbers of sequences eliminated in thedata reduction phase, and the time needed for this. Thereduced data sets in each case are then executed by thealgorithm, and the running times are recorded (see table4). For estimating the time complexity of the algorithm,we measure the amount of the input (reduced) data bycounting the total number mof entries in the aligned
sequences (i.e., multiplying the numbers of input se-quences and of varied positions), and then assume afunctional relationship of computing time tand size m
of the form t
øamb. With a least-squares approach ap-
plied after taking logarithms, we estimate from table 4that
aø1.631027s and bø2.2. Applying this for-
mula to the complete data set after data reduction (i.e.,1,258 sequences of length 185), we would expect a run-ning time of 28 h and 30 min. Compared with the actualrunning time, this is an overestimate of more than 8%.
Since the number of varied sites in HVS-Iincreases
very slowly with sample size and is bounded by thesegment length, we may express the expected total run-ning time (including data reduction) in terms of thenumber of sampled sequences. For larger data sets (withsizes above 500), we still observe an average case com-plexity on the order of 2.2.
Postprocessing
After having run MJ with different settings of
«
(and possibly alternative weighting schemes for the se-
quence positions), one should focus on certain parts ofthe MJ network, namely nontrivial blocks and largecells, in order to enhance a parsimony search. A blockof a network Nis any maximal connected subnetwork
which cannot be disconnected by deleting any one of itsnodes. The blocks of a tree are all trivial; i.e., they areformed by the pairs of linked nodes. Every cycle in N
extends to a nontrivial block (located within the ``tor-so,'' which is the smallest connected subnetwork of N
containing all nontrivialblocks).Twodistinctblockscanintersect in at most one node. Nodes occurring in morethan one block are called cut nodes. Deletion of a cutnode then disconnects N.The network Nis therefore
built up in a cactuslike fashion from its blocks. For ex-ample, the network of ®gure 4 chasone nontrivialblock,
the cube, and two trivial blocks, the pendant links. Aslong as there is no ``obsolete'' block (i.e., a block withexactly one cut node and harboring no sampled se-quence different from the cut sequence), every tree sub-network of an MJ network Nwhich connects the sam-
pled sequences necessarily includes all cut nodes of N.
In contrast, one may remove any single node which nei-ther is a cut node nor is represented by a sampled se-quence and still retain a subnetwork connecting thewhole sample. Since all tree estimates realized within N
are unanimous about the inclusion of the sequences la-beling the cut nodes, we may treat these sequences asif they were actually sampled and rerun MJ with thethus expanded data set, this time applying it to eachblock separately. For example, consider the three super-imposed MJ networks (
«50, 1, 2) in ®gure 5. The MJ
network for «52 hasV, W,andXas its cut nodes,
giving rise to six blocks, the prism, and ®ve pendantlinks. MJ applied to C, V, W, andXrecovers the prism
whenever
«$1 is chosen, but with «50, no median
vector is generated, as C, V, W, andXform a one-step
path. Consequently, the MJ network for «50 shrinks
to the MP tree, whereas the MJ network for «51 ex-
pands to the full quasimedian network, thus eliminatingthe nonmonotonicity anomaly in this case. Another in-stance in which this postprocessing of blocks comesintoplay is in the MJ network (with
«50) of ®gure 6. The
torso of this network comprises four (nontrivial) blocks,namely two four-cycles and two ``dominoes'' (eachcomposed of two four-cycles sharing a link). The dom-ino harboring types 143 and 146 includes three unla-beled cut nodes; applying MJ with
«50 to these ®ve
sequences does not generate the sixth node of the dom-ino anymore. Therefore, postprocessing the blocks hereDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


46 Bandelt et al.
FIG. 7.ÐMJ networks for amino acid sequences of primate AB0 blood group enzymes, based on examined positions 153±283 (Saitou and
Yamamoto 1997, table 3, but with amino acid P at position 157 transferred from Ch3 to Ch5). Pre®xes Ch, Go, Or, Mac, and Ba stand forchimpanzee, gorilla, orang-utan, macaque, and baboon, respectively, whereas the unpre®xed labels refer to human AB0 enzymes. The fullnetwork represents the raw MJ network for
«51; the postprocessed network for «51 is obtained by deleting the obsolete nodes and links
indicated by dotted lines; the MJ network for «50 is described by the unbroken lines. Underlining indicates resolved multiple hits at aposition.
results in the network exactly composed of the MP trees
(which coincides with the greedy FHP network).
The MJ algorithm cannot guarantee that all obso-
lete intermediate sequence types will be eliminated instep 3, since the quick test for the number of incidentlinks cannot detect obsolete groups of tightly clusteredsequences. To give an illustration, consider the aminoacid sequences of primate AB0 blood group enzymescompiled by Saitou and Yamamoto (1997, table 3). Set-ting
«to 1 (and disregarding four partially unexamined,
uninformative positions), we obtain the MJ networkshown in ®gure 7 for these data; the threenodesincidentwith the dotted links are remnants of preliminary con-nections abandoned later in the course of the algorithm.(For
«50, these nodes are no longer present, but for
«$2 they become functional in that they provide al-
ternative connections.) Postprocessing the single non-trivial block for
«51 eliminates these three sequence
types along with the incident links. The postprocessednetwork decomposes along the cut node represented by
the human sequence A1-1/A3-1 into the full quasimedian
network for the AB0 enzymes from humans, chimpan-zees,and gorillas on one sideandtheperfecttreelinkingthe AB0 enzymes from orang-utans, baboons, and ma-caques with A
1-1/A3-1 on the other side. According to
this network, positions 176 and 235 each have experi-enced two changes (but caused by mutations at differentnucleotide positions at the DNA level). Strikingly, ami-no acid positions 266 and 268 have mutated in concertat least twice and possibly three times during the diver-gence of humans, gorillas, and orang-utans. These twoamino acid changes are necessary and suf®cient to con-vert a blood group A enzyme to a functional bloodgroup B enzyme, suggesting that their recurrent appear-ance in primate evolution may have been selected for(Saitou and Yamamoto 1997).
The most alarming substructures in MJ networks
that need closer investigation are large cells. The cellsDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


Median-Joining Networks 47
of a network Nare, intuitively speaking, kinds of min-
imal cycles from which the nontrivial blocks of Nare
built up. More precisely, using mathematical jargon, acell is any cycle which cannot be obtained as the ``mod-ulo 2'' sum of cycles with fewer links in the linearspace(over the prime ®eld) associated with the set of links ofN.The cells in a full quasimedian network (and inci-
dentally, in all the networks shown in this article) arethree- or four-cycles. We then speak of a large cell if itsnumber of links exceeds four. Arbitrarily large cells caneasily be generated from arti®cial data sets; consider,forinstance, n
$6 binary sequences A1,A2,...,Anof
lengthn,where the ith position is 1 at AiandAi11, but
0 otherwise (indices read modulo n). The MJ network
of this data set for «$2 is the full median network,
which resembles a rosette or bouquet of four-cycles.When MJ is applied with
«#1 instead,atwo-stepcycle
is obtained which coincides with the minimum spanningnetwork. The length of a minimum spanning tree (path)equals 2n
22 here.Incontrast,theMPtreeshavelength
(3/2)nifnis even and (3/2) n1(1/2) ifnis odd. Thus,
the length differences between spanning path and MPtree grow linearly with n.In practice, large cells may
occur for several reasons: either homoplasy is generallyhigh and the choice of
«was too low (the result of a
desire to produce a treelike or at least drawable net-work), or recombination (gene conversion, etc.) has par-tially acted on the data, or ambiguities of states in thesampled sequences are too frequent, or artifacts, such ascontamination or documentation errors, are present. It isthen recommended to generate the full quasimedian net-work of the sequences (whether sampled or reconstruct-ed) representing the nodes of a particular large cell andto investigate the causes for its appearance in the MJnetwork under study.
Hybrid Approaches
The construction of the MJ network may be en-
hanced by running the RM method beforehand. RM op-erates in a fashion complementary to MJ in that it ®rstresolves some character con¯icts and eventually returnsan extended data matrix with more characters but a re-duced level of homoplasy. RM may also be regarded asparameter-driven: the crucial parameter r(the ``reduc-
tion threshold''), set equal to 2 by default, expresses, inequation (5) of Bandelt et al. (1995), how much largerthe total weight of compatible characters compared witha con¯icting character must be in order to postulate aparallelism for the latter. Thus, lowering rtoward 1
leads to further ``reduction'' of network reticulationsinto more treelike networks, thereby increasing the riskof discarding the true evolutionary paths, whereas a re-duction threshold r
$2 (as we would recommend when
RM is combined with MJ for «#1), postulates fewer,
but more obvious, recurrent events beforehand.
MJ and RM alone may not be ideally suited to data
supporting potential phylogenies with rather longbranches. In these cases, MJ may also be combined withothertree-building methods,sinceitexploresarestrictedsolution space in the (joint) neighborhood of postulatedtrees. To this end, one would apply MJ to a set of se-
quences which comprises the original data set plus an-cestral sequences hypothesized either from tree-buildingmethods applied to the original data or from networkanalyses of smaller subsets, thus allowing for a hierar-chical approach.
Acknowledgments
We thank N. Saitou, V. Macaulay, T. Warnow, and
an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments. Thiswork was performed by A.R. in partial ful®llment of therequirements for the doctoral degree.
APPENDIX 1
We verify thattheconstructednetwork Ncomprises
exactly the links occurring in minimum spanning trees.Consider any link from Nbetween sequence types Xand
Yof length
di. Select a preference ordering for the pairs
of sequence types at distance diwhere the pair X, Y
comes ®rst. Since the link X, Yconnects different com-
ponents of the partial network constructed up to distance
di21, there cannot be any path between XandYfor
which all links have lengths di21or smaller. Kruskal's
algorithm (after having processed the pairs of sequencetypes at distances
#di21) would then select the link X,
Y,given the prescribed preferenceordering.Ontheother
hand, the network Nmust include all links of an arbi-
trary minimum spanning tree T.Suppose the contrary;
namely, let the pair U, Vconstitute the shortest link of
Tthat would not be found in N.When this link is re-
moved,Tfalls to two connected components. Necessar-
ily (asTis minimal), all links of Nconnecting these two
components have lengths of at least the distance diofU
andV.Therefore, in the construction of N,the sequence
typesUandVbelong to different components of the
partial network erected right after distancevalue di21has
been processed. The link U, Vwould then be added to
the growing network at the next stage (for distance val-ues
di), contrary to our assumption.
APPENDIX 2
It remains to verify that the segments bounded by
disjoint pairs V, WandX, Yof linked sequence types
(having no ambiguous states) from the constructed net-work do not intersect. Suppose the contrary; then thereis some vector Z(from the sequence space) satisfying
d(V, Z)
1d(W, Z)5d(V, W)
and
d(X, Z)1d(Y, Z)5d(X, Y) (1)
wheredis the (possibly weighted) distance in sequence
space. Then,
d(V, X)1d(W, Y)
#d(V, Z)1d(X, Z)1d(W, Z)1d(Y, Z)
5d(V, W)1d(X, Y) (2)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025


48 Bandelt et al.
by virtue of the triangle inequality and equality(1).Sim-
ilarly,
d(V, Y)1d(W, X)#d(V, W)1d(X, Y). (3)
Assume
d(V, W)#d(X, Y). (4)
Letdbe the largest distance strictly smaller than d(V,
W) between sequence types from the network. Since the
pairsV, WandX, Yconstitute feasible links (withregard
to«50), we can stateÐafter interchanging the roles
ofXandYif necessaryÐthat neither VandXnorW
andYare within a d-step component. In particular, the
distances for these pairs exceed dand thus are bounded
byd(V, W) from below. Assuming
d(V, X)#d(W, Y) (5)
without loss of generality, the preceding fact may be
expressed by the single inequality
d(V, W)#d(V, X). (6)
Moreover, as XandYdo not belong to the same d-step
component,
d(X, Y)
#min(max( d(V,X),d(V,Y)),max(d(W,X),d(W,Y))).
(7)
In view of inequality (5), this may be simpli®ed to
d(X, Y)#max(d(W, Y), min(d(V, Y),d(W, X))). (8)
Ifd(X, Y)#d(W, Y) is true, then combining this in-
equality with inequalities (6) and (2) implies that equal-ity must hold throughout, and in particular,
d(V, W)
5d(V, X)
and
d(X, Y)5d(W, Y) (9)
would be true. If, however, d(X, Y).d(W, Y), then
inequality (3), together with inequality (8), would yieldthe equalities d(V, W)
5d(X, Y)5d(V, Y)5d(W, X),
which are then in con¯ict with d(V, W)#d(W, Y),
d(X, Y) (employing inequalities 5 and 6). We conclude
that equality (9) is indeed the only alternative. Sinceinequality (2) is thus an equality, it follows that
d(V, Z)
1d(X, Z)5d(V, X). (10)
Hence,Zbelongs to both segments from VtoWand
fromVtoX,respectively. We conclude that there would
be a median vector for the triplet V, W, Xwhich is nec-
essarily different from V, W, X. This, however, would
contradict the status of feasible links (such as the pairsV, WandV, X) in the ®nal network. This settles the
claim.
LITERATURE CITED
ANDERSON, S., B. G. B ANKIER,M .H .B ARRELLet al. (14 co-
authors). 1981. Sequence and organisation of the humanmitochondrial genome. Nature 290:457±465.B
ANDELT, H.-J., P. F ORSTER,B .C .S YKES, and M. B. R ICH-
ARDS. 1995. Mitochondrial portraits of human populations
using median networks. Genetics 141:743±753.
BANDELT, H.-J., H. M. M ULDER, and E. W ILKEIT. 1994.Quasi-
median graphs and algebras. J. Graph Theory 18:681±703.
CHEN, Y.-C., A. T ORRONI,L .EXCOFFIER ,A .S .S ANTACHIARA -
BENERECETTI , and D. C. W ALLACE. 1995. Analysis of
mtDNA variation in African populations reveals the mostancient of all human continent-speci®c haplogroups. Am. J.Hum. Genet. 57:133±149.
E
XCOFFIER , L., and P. E. S MOUSE. 1994. Using allele frequen-
cies and geographic subdivision to reconstruct gene treeswithin a species: molecular variance parsimony. Genetics136:343±359.
F
ARRIS, J. S. 1970. Methods for computing Wagner trees. Syst.
Zool.19:83±92.
FORSTER, P., R. H ARDING,A .TORRONI, and H.-J. B ANDELT.
1997. Reply to Bianchi and Bailliet. Am. J. Hum. Genet.61:245±247.
F
OULDS, L. R., M. D. H ENDY, and D. P ENNY. 1979. A graph
theoretic approach to the development of minimal phylo-genetic trees. J. Mol. Evol. 13:127±149.
H
WANG, F. K., D. S. R ICHARDS, and P. W INTER. 1992. The
Steiner tree problem. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
KRUSKAL, J. B. 1956. On the shortest spanning subtree of the
graph and the travelling salesman problem. Proc. Amer.Math. Soc. 7:48±57.
N
ACHMAN, M. W., W. M. B ROWN,M .STONEKING , and C. F.
AQUADRO. 1996. Nonneutral mitochondrial DNA variation
in humans and chimpanzees. Genetics 142:953±963.
PRIM, R. C. 1957. Shortest connection networks and some gen-
eralizations. Bell Syst. Technol. J. 36:1389±1401.
ROÈHL, A. 1997. Network. A program package for phylogenetic
networks. Mathematisches Seminar, Universita Èt Hamburg
(available on request).
SAITOU, N., and F. Y AMAMOTO . 1997. Evolution of primate
AB0 blood group genes and their homologous genes. Mol.Biol. Evol. 14:399±411.
S
WOFFORD , D. L., G. J. O LSEN,P .J .W ADDELL, and D. M.
HILLIS. 1996. Phylogenetic inference. InD. M. H ILLIS,C .
MORITZ, and B. K. M ABLE, eds.Molecularsystematics.Sin-
auer, Sunderland, Mass.
TATENO, Y. 1990. A method for molecularphylogenyconstruc-
tion by direct use of nucleotide sequence data. J. Mol. Evol.30:85±93.
T
ORRONI, A., K. H UOPONEN ,P .FRANCALACCI ,M .PETROZZI,
L. MORELLI,R .SCOZZARI,D .OBINU,M .L .S AVONTAUS ,
and D. C. W ALLACE. 1996. Classi®cation of European
mtDNAs from an analysis of three European populations.Genetics 144:1835±1850.
T
ORRONI, A., J. A. M ILLER,L .G .M OORE,S .ZAMUDIO,J .
ZHUANG,T .DROMA, and D. C. W ALLACE. 1994. Mitochon-
drial DNA analysis in Tibet: implications for the origin ofthe Tibetan population and its adaptiontohighaltitude.Am.J. Phys. Anthropol. 93:189±199.
T
ORRONI, A., R. I. S UKERNIK,T .G .S CHURR,Y .B .S TARIKOV-
SKAYA,M .F .C ABELL,M .H .C RAWFORD ,A .S .G .C OMUZ-
ZIE, and D. C. W ALLACE. 1993. mtDNA variation of ab-
original Siberians reveals distinct genetic af®nities with Na-tive Americans. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 53:591±608.
NARUYASAITOU, reviewing editor
Accepted August 31, 1998Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/16/1/37/993192 by guest on 17 November 2025
