

This page intentionally left blank

Phylogenetic Networks
Concepts, Algorithms and Applications
The evolutionary history of species is traditionally represented using a rooted phylogenetic tree.However, when reticulate events such as hybridization, horizontal gene transfer or recombinationare believed to be involved, phylogenetic networks that can accommodate non-treelike evolutionhave an important role to play.
This book provides the ﬁrst interdisciplinary overview of phylogenetic networks. Beginning
with a concise introduction to both phylogenetic trees and phylogenetic networks, the fun-damental concepts and results are then presented for both rooted and unrooted phylogeneticnetworks. Current approaches and algorithms a vailable for computing phylogenetic networks
from different types of datasets are then discussed, accompanied by examples of their appli-cation to real biological datasets. The book also summarizes the algorithms used for drawingphylogenetic networks, along with the existing software for their computation and evaluation.
All datasets, examples and other additional information and links are available from the book’s
companion website at: www.phylogenetic-networks.org.Daniel H. Huson is Professor of Algorithms in Bioinformatics at T ¨ubingen University. He has
authored numerous papers in bioinformatics, biology and mathematics, and is the main authorof the widely used computer programs Dendroscope, MEGAN and SplitsTree.Regula Rupp received her Ph.D. in Mathematics from Bern University in 2006. Between 2007
and 2009 she held a postdoctoral research position at T ¨ubingen University, working with Daniel
H. Huson in developing robust methods for computing phylogenetic networks from real biolog-ical data.Celine Scornavacca is a postdoctoral researcher working on algorithms for phylogenetic
networks with Daniel H. Huson at T ¨ubingen University. She received her Ph.D. in Computer
Science from Montpellier University in 2009.



Phylogenetic Networks
Concepts, Algorithms and Applications
Daniel H. Huson
Eberhard-Karls-Universit ¨at T¨ubingen, Germany
Regula Rupp
Eberhard-Karls-Universit ¨at T¨ubingen, Germany
Celine Scornavacca
Eberhard-Karls-Universit ¨at T¨ubingen, Germany


cambridge university pressCambridge, New Y ork, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape T own, Singapore,S˜ao Paulo, Delhi, Dubai, T okyo, Mexico City
Cambridge University PressThe Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UKPublished in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New Y orkwww.cambridge.orgInformation on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521755962
C/circlecopyrtD. H. Huson, R. Rupp and C. Scornavacca 2010
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exceptionand to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,no reproduction of any part may take place without the writtenpermission of Cambridge University Press.First published 2010Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, CambridgeA catalog record for this publication is available from the British LibraryLibrary of Congress Cataloging in Publication dataHuson, Daniel H.Phylogenetic networks : concepts, algorithms and applications / Daniel H. Huson, Regula Rupp,Celine Scornavacca.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.ISBN 978-0-521-75596-2 (hardback)1. Cladistic analysis – Data processing. 2. Cladistic analysis – Mathematics. 3. Phylogeny.I. Rupp, Regula. II. Scornavacca, Celine. III. Title.QH83.H87 2011578.01
/prime2 – dc22 2010037669
ISBN 978-0-521-75596-2 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence oraccuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred toin this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on suchwebsites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Contents
Preface page ix
Part I Introduction 1
1Basics 3
1.1 Overview 3
1.2 Undirected and directed graphs 3
1.3 Trees 7
1.4 Rooted DAGs 8
1.5 Traversals of trees and DAGs 9
1.6 Taxa, clusters, clades and splits 11
2Sequence alignment 13
2.1 Overview 13
2.2 Pairwise sequence alignment 13
2.3 Multiple sequence alignment 20
3Phylogenetic trees 23
3.1 Overview 23
3.2 Phylogenetic trees 24
3.3 The number of phylogenetic trees 27
3.4 Models of DNA evolution 29
3.5 The phylogenetic tree reconstruction problem 32
3.6 Sequence-based methods 33
3.7 Maximum parsimony 33
3.8 Branch-swapping methods 37
3.9 Maximum likelihood estimation 40
3.10 Bootstrap analysis 43
v

vi Contents
3.11 Bayesian methods 45
3.12 Distance-based methods 50
3.13 UPGMA 52
3.14 Neighbor-joining 54
3.15 Balanced minimum evolution 56
3.16 Comparing trees 60
3.17 Consensus trees 63
3.18 The Newick format 66
4Introduction to phylogenetic networks 68
4.1 Overview 69
4.2 What is a phylogenetic network? 69
4.3 Unrooted phylogenetic networks 71
4.4 Rooted phylogenetic networks 76
4.5 The extended Newick format 81
4.6 Which types of networks are currently used in practice? 83
Part II Theory 85
5Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks 87
5.1 Overview 87
5.2 Splits 88
5.3 Compatibility and incompatibility 90
5.4 Splits and clusters 91
5.5 Split networks 93
5.6 The canonical split network 97
5.7 Circular splits and planar split networks 102
5.8 Weak compatibility 105
5.9 The split decomposition 107
5.10 Representing trees in a split network 121
5.11 Comparing split networks 122
5.12 T-theory 122
6Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks 127
6.1 Overview 127
6.2 Clusters, compatibility and incompatibility 128
6.3 Hasse diagrams 132
6.4 Cluster networks 133
6.5 Rooted phylogenetic networks 138
6.6 The lowest stable ancestor 140

vii Contents
6.7 Representing trees in rooted networks 144
6.8 Hardwired and softwired clusters 146
6.9 Minimum rooted phylogenetic networks 149
6.10 Decomposability 150
6.11 T opological constraints on rooted networks 156
6.12 Cluster containment in rooted networks 168
6.13 Tree containment 171
6.14 Comparing rooted networks 171
Part III Algorithms and applications 185
7Phylogenetic networks from splits 187
7.1 The convex hull algorithm 187
7.2 The circular network algorithm 190
8Phylogenetic networks from clusters 193
8.1 Cluster networks 193
8.2 Divide-and-conquer using decomposition 194
8.3 Galled trees 198
8.4 Galled networks 201
8.5 Level- knetworks 210
9Phylogenetic networks from sequences 216
9.1 Condensed alignments 216
9.2 Binary sequences and splits 216
9.3 Parsimony splits 218
9.4 Median networks 219
9.5 Quasi-median networks 223
9.6 Median-joining 227
9.7 Pruned quasi-median networks 232
9.8 Recombination networks 233
9.9 Galled trees 240
10 Phylogenetic networks from distances 250
10.1 Distances and splits 250
10.2 Minimum spanning networks 251
10.3 Split decomposition 251
10.4 Neighbor-net 254
10.5 T-Rex 261

viii Contents
11 Phylogenetic networks from trees 265
11.1 Consensus split networks 265
11.2 Consensus super split networks for unrooted trees 268
11.3 Distortion-ﬁltered super split networks for unrooted trees 273
11.4 Consensus cluster networks for rooted trees 274
11.5 Minimum hybridization networks 275
11.6 Minimum hybridization networks and galled trees 285
11.7 Networks from multi-labeled trees 287
11.8 DLT reconciliation of gene and species trees 289
12 Phylogenetic networks from triples or quartets 300
12.1 Trees from rooted triples 300
12.2 Level- knetworks from rooted triples 302
12.3 The quartet-net method 308
13 Drawing phylogenetic networks 312
13.1 Overview 312
13.2 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic trees 312
13.3 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic networks 316
13.4 Phylograms for rooted phylogenetic trees 323
13.5 Phylograms for rooted phylogenetic networks 324
13.6 Drawing rooted phylogenetic networks with transfer edges 327
13.7 Radial diagrams for unrooted trees 328
13.8 Radial diagrams for split networks 329
14 Software 332
14.1 SplitsTree 332
14.2 Network 333
14.3 TCS 334
14.4 Dendroscope 334
14.5 Other programs 335
Glossary 338
References 343
Index 358

Preface
The evolutionary history of a set of species is usually described by a rooted phy-l o g e n e t i ct r e e .T h ec o n c e p to far o o t e dt r e ei sv e r ys i m p l ea n dh a sp r o v e dt ob eextremely useful in many application domains. However, the truth is rarely pure
and never simple.
1
By deﬁnition, phylogenetic trees are well suited to represent evolutionary histo-
ries in which the main events are speciations (at the internal nodes of the tree) anddescent with modiﬁcation (along the edges of the tree). But such trees are less suitedto model mechanisms of reticulate evolution [219], such as horizontal gene trans-
fer, hybridization, recombination or reassortment. Moreover, mechanisms such asincomplete lineage sorting, or complicated patterns of gene duplication and loss,can lead to incompatibilities that cannot be represented on a tree. Although theanalysis of individual genes or short stretches of genomic sequence often givesstrong support to a phylogenetic tree, different genes or sequence segments usuallysupport different trees.
While it is generally undisputed that bifurcating speciation events and descent
with modiﬁcations are major forces of evolution, there is also a growing belief thatreticulate events play an important role in the shaping of evolutionary histories,too [ 55,61,111, 173].
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT), the direct transfer of genes from one organism
to another, is known to occur very frequently in the prokaryotic world, the mainmechanisms being transformation, conjugation and transduction [ 13,28,189,
231]. Because of horizontal gene transfer, even between quite distantly related
species, phylogenetic trees on the same taxa based on different genes may be veryincongruent and the questions arise of how to deﬁne the concept of a species treefor a set of prokaryotic taxa, and then how to infer it? One answer may be torepresent the evolutionary history of a set of prokaryotes by an appropriate rootedphylogenetic network that encompasses the different gene histories [ 54,153, 157].
1Oscar Wilde, The Importance of Being Earnest, 1895.
ix

x Preface
In a more general setting, horizontal gene transfers are considered together with
gene duplication and loss events [56, 197]. Here the goal is to reconcile incongruent
gene trees with a given species tree under a model of duplication, loss and transfer
(DLT) [ 100].
Speciation by hybridization is a widespread phenomenon in plants [ 201,202],
b u ta l s oo c c u r si ns o m eo t h e rt y p e so fo r g a n i s m s[ 153,165]. In allopolyploidization,
two individuals from distinct species hybridize and merge their sets of chromo-somes. In rare cases this produces a new fertile species that is reproductively isolatedfrom the parent species. In diploid hybridization, two parents from different specieseach supply a gamete and produce a diploid hybrid. In very rare cases the hybridmay become reproductively isolated from the parents and then evolve as a dis-tinct species. Phylogenies involving hybrid species are more informative when theyexplicitly include postulated hybridization events.
Recombination and gene conversion produce new combinations of genetic mate-
rial through pairing and shufﬂing of very similar DNA sequences [ 190]. It is usu-
ally considered a mechanism that belongs within the realm of population genetics,which deals with the statistical analysis of the inheritance and prevalence of genes inpopulations [ 118]. In this context, the evolution of sequences under the coalescent-
with-recombination model gives rise to an ancestral recombination graph (ARG)
[89, 108], which is used for statistical inference and is beyond the scope of this
book. However, as sequencing technologies advance and more projects aim at thefull (re)sequencing of many individuals, strains and species [242 ], the ﬁelds of
phylogenetic analysis and population genetics are drawing closer together. Beingable to explicitly represent recombination in a network is of value to both ﬁelds[98, 128, 169, 194].
When interspeciﬁc recombination occurs, it may result in different histories
for different segments of an individual gene and thus impact the performance ofphylogenetic tree reconstruction methods [ 198, 207, 211]. In such cases, a network
reconstruction method may be more suitable.
Reassortment is akin to recombination in that it involves the swapping of genetic
material between individual organisms. Many viruses, such as inﬂuenza A, havesegmented genomes. The evolution of such viruses involves mutations, of course.Moreover, when the viruses co-infect a host cell, then segments of their genomescan be swapped in a process called reassortment [47]. Hence, a phylogenetic treewill not always sufﬁce to correctly represent the evolutionary history of a populationof such viruses in a host, and sometimes a network representation will be moreappropriate [21].
In an essay entitled “Mathematics is biology’s next microscope, only better;
biology is mathematics’ next physics, only better” [ 53], the author poses “ﬁve
biological challenges that could stimulate, and beneﬁt from, major innovations in

xi Preface
mathematics.” The third challenge is: “Replace the tree of life with a network ortapestry to represent lateral transfers of heritable features such as genes, genomes,and prions.”
While there is a great need for practical and reliable computational methods for
inferring rooted phylogenetic networks to explicitly describe evolutionary scenarios
involving reticulate events, generally speaking, such methods do not yet exist, orhave not yet matured enough to become standard tools.
In contrast, there exist a number of established computational methods for
inferring unrooted phylogenetic networks, which are used to abstractly describe
reticulate evolution by providing a visualization of incompatible evolutionary path-ways. Among the most widely used are methods for computing split networks [ 9],
median networks [ 11] quasi-median networks [ 10], and other types of haplotype
networks [ 52]. Such methods are not only used in phylogenetic analysis, but also
in phylogeography and population genetics, as well.
The phylogenetic analysis of molecular sequences using phylogenetic trees is
an established ﬁeld and there are a number of books that describe the differentapproaches in detail, such as [77, 163, 217]. Population genetics is a similarly
mature discipline that has been treated in a number of books, including [ 102, 108].
Both phylogeny and population genetics remain very active areas of research thatare developing further.
Although there has been a number of book chapters published on the subject of
phylogenetic networks (for example [ 123, 181,182,184,214]), to the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst book that is solely dedicated to the topic.
The overall aim of our book is to give an introduction to the ﬁeld of phylogenetic
networks. As bioinformaticans, we sit between the mathematicians who developtheories and concepts for modeling and calculating phylogenetic networks, and thebiologists who are focused on understanding the evolution of the organisms thatthey are interested in, using the concepts, algorithms and tools that we help toprovide for them. Hence, while the content of this book is complementary to Phy-
logenetics [217] by Semple and Steel and Inferring Phylogenies [77] by Felsenstein,
we have aimed at making the exposition in our book less mathematical than theformer, while being more formal and algorithmic than the latter.
The book has three parts. In Part I, Introduction, we ﬁrst describe some basic
concepts, mainly from elementary graph theory. We then give introductions tosequence alignment and to phylogenetic analysis using trees. Our hope is that thiswill make the book a self-contained introduction both to phylogenetic trees andnetworks, to a degree. In the last chapter of Part I we give an introduction tophylogenetic networks, providing a high-level overview of the area. The details arethen given in the remaining two parts of the book.

xii Preface
In Part II, Theory, we develop the theoretical underpinning ﬁrst for splits and
unrooted networks, and then for clusters and rooted networks. Here we attemptto develop a uniﬁed treatment of a number of different aspects of both types ofnetworks.
In Part III, Algorithms and Applications, we systematically describe many of the
existing algorithms for computing phylogenetic networks. The chapters here areorganized by type of input that the algorithms work on. For many of the algorithmswe brieﬂy summarize their applications that have been reported in the literature.The last chapter gives an overview of some of the software that is available forcomputing phylogenetic networks from biological data.
W ew o u l dl i k et oa c k n o w l e d g et h ea d v i c ea n ds u p p o r tt h a tw eh a v er e c e i v e d
from a number of colleagues. First, and foremost, we would like to thank AndreasDress in Shanghai, who introduced D. H. to the topic in the early nineties, whohas been a source of great inspiration and is the “father” of a whole generationof bio-mathematicians and bio-informaticians in Germany and abroad. Second,D. H. would like to thank Tandy Warnow in Austin, T exas, for two very valuablepost-doc years working with her on phylogenetics. Third, we would like to thankMike Steel, Pete Lockhart and David Bryant in New Zealand, with whom D. H. hasworked closely on phylogenetic networks over a number of years.
We are also very grateful to the following colleagues for helpful discussions and
for comments on different parts of the manuscript: Elizabeth S. Allman, ThomasBonfert, Magnus Bordewich, David Bryant, Sydney Cameron, T obias Dezulian,Johannes Fischer, Olivier Gascuel, Stefan Gr ¨unewald, Dan Gusﬁeld, Jotun Hein,
M i k eH e n d y ,L e ov a nI e r s e l ,T o b i a sK l ¨o p p e r ,P e t eL o c k h a r t ,B i l lM a r t i n ,D a v i dM o r -
rison, Luay Nakhleh, Kay Nieselt, David Penny, Christian Rausch, John A. Rhodes,Stephan C. Schuster, Charles Semple, Yun Song, Mike Steel, Ali T oﬁgh, GabrielValiente, Detlef Weigel and Jim Whitﬁeld.
We thank the Newton Institute of Cambridge University for hosting the Phyloge-
netics research program in 2007, which was jointly organized by Vincent Moulton,
Mike Steel and D. H. The program gave us an excellent opportunity to draft anddiscuss a ﬁrst outline of this book. We used early versions of our manuscript as thebasis of two courses on Phylogenetic Networks at T¨ubingen University in 2008 and
2009 and would like to thank the participating students for their useful feedback.We are grateful to the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for ﬁnancial support ofour research on phylogenetic networks.
Finally, D. H. would like to thank his wife, Elke Grieswelle, and his two sons,
Marlon and Moritz, for their love and support. R. R. would to like thank all herfriends for their encouragement and especially her husband, Bernhard Nemec, forhis love and patience. C. S. would like to thank her friends and family for theirencouragement, support and affection.

Part I
Introduction
In the ﬁrst part of this book we give an introduction to basic concepts fromgraph theory and systematics (Chapter 1). We brieﬂy discuss the problem of
aligning molecular sequences (Chapter 2) and give a more detailed introduction
to the computation of phylogenetic trees from aligned sequences and distances(Chapter 3). Finally, we give a brief introduction to the computation of phyloge-
netic networks, which also serves as an overview for the material presented in thesecond and third parts of the book (Chapter 4).
Chapters 2and 3are provided for the sake of completeness and reference. They can
be skipped by readers who have a basic knowledge of phylogenetic analysis.



1
Basics
In this chapter we introduce some basic concepts and results from mathematicsand biological taxonomy.
1.1 Overview
The focus of this chapter is on the introduction of graphs (see Figure 1.1). Graphs
come in two ﬂavors, undirected and directed . One type of undirected graph that
plays an important role in this book is unrooted trees.I nt h ec o n t e x to fd i r e c t e d
graphs, we discuss the concept of a directed, acyclic graph (DAG) and then introduce
rooted trees as an important example. We introduce a number of different kinds of
traversals of trees or DAGs that are often used in algorithms. This chapter concludes
by introducing the concepts of taxa, clusters ,clades and splits .
1.2 Undirected and directed graphs
A graph is a convenient and popular way of representing relationships betweenobjects: in a graph, objects are represented by nodes and relationships between
objects are represented by edges .T h e r ea r et w ot y p e so fg r a p h s , undirected and
directed , and we make use of both types throughout the book. First, we deﬁne
undirected graphs:Deﬁnition 1.2.1 (Undirected graph) Anundirected graph G=(V,E)consists of
a ﬁnite set of nodes V and a ﬁnite set of edges E, w h e r e e a c h edge e∈Ei s o f t h e
form{v,w},w i t h v,w∈V( s e eF i g u r e 1.2a).
For an edge e={v,w}we call vandwtheendpoints ofeand we say that e
connects vandw. We also say that both vandwareincident toe. We say that two
edges are adjacent , if they share an endpoint, and two nodes are adjacent if they are
connected by an edge. The degree of a node vis the number of edges that are incident
tov.
3

4 Basics
Figure 1.1 Overview of the main concepts introduced in this chapter.
(a) Undirected graph (b) Directed graph (c) DAG
Figure 1.2 (a) An undirected graph with five nodes labeled a,..., e. Here, each node is shown as a
small disk •, however, we usually refrain from emphasizing nodes in this way. Edges are
represented by lines connecting the incident nodes. (b) A directed graph with five nodes
a,..., e. An arrow from node vto node wrepresents the directed edge (v,w ).( c )AD A G
(directed acyclic graph) in which all edges are directed away from the node a.
Unless otherwise stated, we usually assume that each pair of nodes is connected
by at most one edge (thus excluding so-called multi-edges) and that every edge is
incident to two different nodes (thus excluding so-called self-loops ). Graphs with
these two additional properties are called simple .
So, in an undirected graph, an edge consists of an unordered pair of two different
nodes. In a directed graph , an edge consists of an ordered pair of nodes and thus has
adirection :
Deﬁnition 1.2.2 (Directed graph) Adirected graph (ordigraph for short) G =
(V,E)consists of a ﬁnite set of nodes V and a ﬁnite set of edges E,w h e r ee a c he d g e
e∈Ei s o f t h e f o r m (v,w ),w i t h v,w∈V( s e eF i g u r e 1.2b).
In a directed graph we say that the edge e=(v,w )i sdirected fromvtow,a n d
we call vthesource andwthetarget ofe.W es a yt h a te is an out-edge ofvand
anin-edge ofw.T h e indegree of a node uis the number of in-edges of uand the

5 1.2 Undirected and directed graphs
outdegree ofuis the number of out-edges of u.T h e degree ofuis the sum of its
indegree and outdegree.
LetG=(V,E) be a directed or undirected graph. A subgraph G/prime=(V/prime,E/prime)o f
ag r a p h Gis a graph whose node and edge sets are subsets of those of G,t h a ti s ,
V/prime⊆Vand E/prime⊆E, such that the edges in E/primeonly contain nodes in V/prime.L e t Ube
a subset of nodes of G. The subgraph G|U=(U,E|U)induced byUhas node set
Uand induced edge set E|Uconsisting of all edges in Gwhose endpoints both lie
inU.
Apath (orundirected path )Pof length len( P)=k≥1 is a sequence of nodes
and edges
P=(v0,e1,v1,e2,v2,..., ek,vk) (1.1)
such that the nodes vi−1andviare the endpoints of the edge ei, for 1 ≤i≤k,a n d
no edge occurs more than once in P. Such a path is said to connect its two endpoints
v0andvk.
In some settings, we may understand a path Pto consist only of the edges that
it contains, in other settings it may be taken to contain only its nodes.
Acycle (orundirected cycle ) is a path in which the ﬁrst node equals the last
nodev0=vk, and for which this is the only node that occurs more than once.
An undirected graph is called acyclic if it contains no cycles. In a directed graph
we can additionally deﬁne directed paths and cycles: a directed path is a path P
in which every edge eiis directed from vi−1tovi, for i=1,...,k . Similarly,
adirected cycle is a cycle with this property. Note that in a directed graph it may
happen that two nodes vandware connected by a path, but not by a directed path.
For example, in Figure 1.2c, nodes band dare connected by a path, but not by
a directed path. A directed graph is called acyclic if it contains no directed cycles.
Directed acyclic graphs play an important role for phylogenetic networks and thusare discussed later in more detail.
LetGbe a directed graph. When necessary, we can also think of Gas an
undirected graph, simply by ignoring the direction of its edges. A special case ariseswhen there are two nodes vandwsuch that both ( v,w )a n d( w,v )a r ee d g e so f G.
In this case, the two directed edges are replaced by a single undirected one {v,w}.
Similarly, if Gis an undirected graph, then we can convert Ginto a directed graph
by choosing a direction for each edge in G.
When modifying a graph G=(V,E), to delete an edge emeans simply to
remove efrom E.H o w e v e r ,t o delete an o d ev , one must remove vfrom Vand also
delete all edges that are incident to v.I fvis a node of degree two in an undirected
graph, then vis called suppressible and to suppress vmeans to ﬁrst connect the two
nodes adjacent to vby a new edge and then to delete v. Similarily, in a directed
graph, a node vcan be suppressed when it has both indegree one and outdegree

6 Basics
Figure 1.3 This graph Ghas three cut nodes, namely 2,4and 7. The graph has four biconnected
components, containing the node sets {1,2},{2,3,4,5},{4,7}and{6,7,8,9}, respectively.
The graph is bipartite, as every edge connects an even-numbered node to an odd-numberedone.
one, by ﬁrst connecting the source node of the in-edge to the target node of theout-edge by a new edge and then deleting v.
Tocontract an edge e=(v,w )m e a n st od e l e t e eand then to merge the two
nodes vandw, in other words, to replace the two nodes vandwby a single
node uand to change all edges incident to vandwso that they become incident
tou, instead. A graph G=(V,E)i sc a l l e dareﬁnement of another graph G
/prime=
(V/prime,E/prime)i fw ec a nc o n t r a c te d g e so f Gin such a way that the resulting graph
equals G/prime.
Ag r a p h G=(V,E)i sc a l l e d bipartite if and only if its set of nodes can be
partitioned into two subsets V1and V2,w i t h V=V1∪V2and V1∩V2=∅,s u c h
that for every edge e∈Eone of the endpoints lies in V1and the other endpoint
lies in V2. Equivalently, a graph is bipartite if one can color the set of nodes using
two colors such that the two endpoints of any edge have different colors.
Any two nodes vandwofGare said to be connected , if there exists an undirected
path that starts at vand ends at w.Ag r a p h G=(V,E)i sc a l l e dconnected if
every pair of nodes v,w∈Vis connected by some undirected path. A connected
component of a graph Gis a maximal connected subgraph. For example, the graph
displayed in Figure 1.4has precisely three connected components. A cut node or
cut edge is a node or edge, respectively, whose removal disconnects the graph.
In the literature a graph Gis sometimes also called weakly connected ,i fa n yt w o
nodes are joined by an undirected path, and strongly connected ,i fa n yt w on o d e sa r e
joined by a directed path. Throughout this book we only make use of the formerdeﬁnition and refer to such graphs as connected.
Abiconnected component is a maximal subgraph that is induced by a set of edges
and does not contain a cut node. In consequence, a graph Gis called a biconnected
component, if either it consists of only one node, or it consists of two nodes joinedby a single edge, or it has more than two nodes and any two nodes vandw
are connected by at least two different paths that are node-disjoint (except at v
andw). For an example of this concept, and some of the others just deﬁned, see
Figure 1.3.
Exercise 1.2.3 (Number of cut nodes and components) Determine the number of
cut nodes and biconnected components in Figure 1.4. Is the graph bipartite?

7 1.3 Trees
Figure 1.4 Graph with ten nodes labeled 1–10 and nine edges.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 1.5 (a) An unrooted tree with 13nodes and 12edges. Exactly 8nodes are leaves and 5are
internal nodes. (b) A rooted tree with 9nodes and 8edges, the root here being the top-
most node ρ. (c) A rooted tree with 11nodes and 10edges, the root here being the left-most
node ρ. This tree is bifurcating, as all internal nodes have outdegree 2.
Throughout this book, we always refer to the constituents of a graph as nodes
and edges , but remark that in the literature nodes are also called vertices (usually
when they are contained in an undirected graph) and edges are also called arcs
(usually when they are directed) or branches (usually when they are contained inaphylogenetic tree ).
1.3 Trees
At r e ei sas p e c i a lk i n do fg r a p h :Deﬁnition 1.3.1 (T ree) Atree is a connected graph with no (undirected) cycles.
In this book, we distinguish between unrooted and rooted trees. By an unrooted tree
we mean any graph satisfying Deﬁnition 1.3.1,s e eF i g u r e 1.5a. In a rooted tree T ,
one node ρis declared the root,s e eF i g u r e 1.5b .I nt h ec a s eo fs u c ha rooted tree
T=(V,E,ρ), we usually think of the graph as being a directed graph in which
all edges are directed away from the root.
In an unrooted tree, all nodes of degree 1 are called leaves and all other nodes
are called internal nodes . In a rooted tree, all nodes of outdegree 0 are called leaves,
all nodes of outdegree ≥1a r ec a l l e d internal nodes and there is only one node with
indegree 0, namely the root ρ.

8 Basics
When drawing rooted trees, the directions of the edges are not indicated explic-
itly, e.g. by drawing arrows, but rather implicitly by special placement of the root,usually at the top, left or bottom of the drawing, with the tree extending to thebottom, right or top, respectively, see Figure 1.5b–c.
An unrooted tree is called bifurcating if every internal node has degree 3. A rooted
tree is called bifurcating if every internal node vhas outdegree 2, see Figure 1.5c.
Nodes that violate this condition are called multifurcating nodes. A bifurcating tree
is also called a resolved tree .
Deﬁnition 1.3.2 (Subtree rooted at v)Let T be a rooted tree and van o d ei nT.W e
deﬁne the subtree rooted at vto be the subgraph T
vof T that is induced by the set of
nodes consisting of vand all nodes that lie on directed paths starting at v. The root of
Tvisv.
Exercise 1.3.3 (Equivalent deﬁnitions of a tree) Prove that the following statements
are equivalent for any undirected graph T =(V,E):
(i)T is a tree.
(ii)Any two nodes v,w∈V of T are connected by exactly one path P .
(iii) T is connected and it is not possible to delete any edge without producing a graph
that is not connected.
(iv) T is connected and the number of nodes exceeds the number of edges by one, that
is|V|=| E|+1.
(v)T is acyclic and the number of nodes exceeds the number of edges by one, that is
|V|=| E|+1.
(vi) T is acyclic and it is not possible to add an edge without creating a cycle.
1.4 Rooted DAGs
Just as trees provide the mathematical basis for phylogenetic trees in Chapter 3,
a generalization of rooted trees called rooted DAGs forms the basis for rooted
phylogenetic networks presented in Chapter 6.AD A Gi sas p e c i a lk i n do fd i r e c t e d
graph:Deﬁnition 1.4.1 (Rooted DAG) Adirected acyclic graph (DAG) is a directed graph
that is free of directed cycles. A DAG is called rooted if it contains precisely one node
of indegree 0, called the root (see Figure 1.2c).
IfGis a DAG, then for any two nodes vandwwe call vanancestor ofw,a n dw
adescendant ofv, if there exists a directed path from vtow.W ec a l l vaparent
ofw,a n dwachild ofvif there exists an edge e=(v,w )f r o m vtow.I fwis
a descendant of v,t h e nw ea l s os a yt h a t wislower thanv. It follows from the

9 1.5 Traversals of trees and DAGs
deﬁnition of a DAG that a node vcannot be simultaneously both a descendant and
also an ancestor of any other node w. Similarly, we say that an edge e=(v,w )i s
lower than an edge f=(v/prime,w/prime), ifvis lower than w/prime. We say that two nodes vand
wareincomparable , if neither node is lower than the other. Similarly, two edges e
and fare called incomparable if neither is lower than the other.
Lemma 1.4.2 (All nodes are descendants of the root) I nar o o t e dD A Ga l ln o d e sa r e
descendants of the root ρ. In particular, a rooted DAG is always (weakly) connected.
Proof Consider some node v.I fvis not the root, then there exists a parent v1of
v. Again, either v1is the root, or v1has a parent v2. Repeating this argument we
obtain a chain of nodes v,v 1,v2,...,v r. Because Gis acyclic, any two nodes in
this chain are distinct. As the set of nodes of Gis ﬁnite, the chain must end at some
node with indegree 0, which is ρ. Following the chain of nodes and edges used
fromρtovprovides a directed path. /square
A useful characterization of a rooted tree is the following:Lemma 1.4.3 (DAG with indegrees one is rooted tree) A DAG is a rooted tree if
and only if it contains precisely one node of indegree 0, which is the root, and all other
nodes have indegree one.Exercise 1.4.4 (Proof) Prove Lemma 1.4.3.
From this characterization and Lemma 1.4.2, it follows for any DAG Gwith root
ρthat, if we delete all but one in-edge for every node vof indegree ≥2i n G,t h e n
the remaining graph is a tree with root ρ.
In analogy to the deﬁnition of the subtree rooted at an o d ev ,w ed e ﬁ n e :
Deﬁnition 1.4.5 (Sub-DAG rooted at v)Let G be a DAG and van o d ei nG .W e
deﬁne the sub-DAG rooted at vas the subgraph G
vof G that is induced by the set of
nodes consisting of vand all descendants of v. The root of G visv.
1.5 Traversals of trees and DAGs
The term tree traversal refers to the process of systematically examining, that is
visiting and processing, every node in a tree exactly once. Such traversals areclassiﬁed by the order in which the nodes are examined. In the following deﬁnitionwe assume that the trees are rooted and bifurcating. However, all the algorithmscan be easily adapted to the case of non-bifurcating trees.Deﬁnition 1.5.1 (T ree traversals) Let T be a bifurcating rooted tree. We distinguish
the following types of tree traversals :

10 Basics
Figure 1.6 A bifurcating tree rooted at node ρ, with other nodes labeled a,..., j.
Traversal Order in which nodes are examined
preorder ρ,j,h,g,a,b,c,i,d,e,f
postorder a,b,g,c,h,d,e,i,j,f,ρ
inorder a,g,b,h,c,j,d,i,e,ρ, f
breadth-ﬁrst ρ,j,f,h,i,g,c,d,e,a,b
Figure 1.7 Different traversals of the tree depicted in Figure 1.6.
/squaresolidPreorder traversal: Examine the root of T. Then traverse its left subtree in preorder,
then traverse its right subtree in preorder.
/squaresolidPostorder traversal: First traverse the left subtree of the root in postorder, then
traverse the right subtree in postorder, and ﬁnally examine the root.
/squaresolidInorder traversal: First traverse the left subtree of the root in inorder, then examine
the root, and then traverse its right subtree in inorder.
/squaresolidBreadth-ﬁrst traversal: Put the root in a queue. Repeat the following until the queue
is empty: Pop a node off the beginning of the queue and examine it. Then, if thenode has any children, push them onto the end of the queue.
The different traversals give rise to different orders in which the nodes are examined.For example, consider the tree shown in Figure 1.6. The order in which nodes are
examined in each of the traversals is listed in Figure 1.7.
Preorder, postorder and breadth-ﬁrst traversals apply more generally to rooted
DAGs:Deﬁnition 1.5.2 (DAG traversals) Let G be a rooted DAG. We distinguish between
the following types of DAG traversals :
/squaresolidPreorder traversal: Examine the root ρ.W h i l eρ has any child vthat has not yet
been examined, traverse the sub-DAG rooted at vin preorder.
/squaresolidPostorder traversal: While the root ρhas any child vthat has not yet been examined,
traverse the sub-DAG rooted at vin postorder. Examine ρ.

11 1.6 Taxa, clusters, clades and splits
/squaresolidBreadth-ﬁrst traversal: Put the root in a queue and mark it. Repeat the following
until the queue is empty: Pop a node off the beginning of the queue and examine it.Then, if the node has any children that have not yet been marked, mark them andpush them onto the end of the queue.
Exercise 1.5.3 (DAG for given traversals) Construct a rooted DAG with nodes
labeled a ,b,..., i such that the three traversals visit the nodes in the following order:
/squaresolidpreorder: i ,a,d,g,h,e,b,f,c
/squaresolidpostorder: g ,h,d,e,a,f,b,c,i
/squaresolidbreadth-ﬁrst: i ,a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h
Construct a second rooted DAG that gives rise to the same traversals.A preorder traversal is also called a top-down algorithm and a postorder traversal is
also called a bottom-up algorithm .
1.6 Taxa, clusters, clades and splits
Throughout this book, we use X={x1,..., xn}to denote a set of taxa,i nw h i c h
each taxon x irepresents some species, group or individual organism whose evolu-
tionary history is of interest to us. For example, X={x1,x2,...}might denote a
set of mammals, with x1representing gorillas, x2representing seals, etc.
We use expressions such as “ Cis a cluster onX”, “Tis a phylogenetic tree on
X”, “Dis a distance matrix onX”o r“ Ais a multiple sequence alignment onX”,
to indicate that the corresponding set of taxa is X.
LetXbe a set of taxa. A cluster is any subset of X, excluding both the empty set
∅and the full set X.
Aphylogeny describes the evolutionary history of a set of taxa and the ultimate
goal of any phylogenetic analysis is to reconstruct some part of the tree of life ,t h e
evolutionary history of all life on Earth.
In this context two species are called related , if they share a recent common
ancestor. We say that a species aismore closely related to a species bthan to a
species c, if the last common ancestor of aand bis more recent that the last
common ancestor of aand c. For example, humans are more closely related to
mice (last common ancestor about 100 million years ago) than they are to fruitﬂies (last common ancestor about 600 million years ago).
A group of organisms is called a clade or a monophyletic group , if it contains
all (and only) the descendants of a common ancestor and the ancestor itself. In amonophyletic cluster C (of extant species) on X, all species are more closely related
t oe a c ho t h e rt h a nt oa n yt a x o no u t s i d eo f C. In other words, all species in Care
descended from a common ancestor, which is not an ancestor of any other taxon

12 Basics
inX. For example, the set of all marsupials forms a monophyletic group within
the class of all mammals.
A cluster ConXthat does not contain all species descended from the last
c o m m o na n c e s t o ro fa l li t sm e m b e r si sc a l l e da paraphyletic group .F o re x a m p l e ,t h e
group of all reptiles is a paraphyletic group because it does not contain the groupof birds or the mammals, both of which descended from ancestors embedded wellwithin the phylogenetic tree of reptiles.
Similarly, a cluster ConXis called a polyphyletic group , if it consists of species
that are descended from multiple last common ancestors, which each have otherdescendants that are not contained in C. For example, the term worms encompasses
both nematodes and earth worms (Lumbricidae), which are evolutionarily sodistant from each other that they belong to different phyla, the Nematoda and theAnnelida.
The main role of phylogenetic analysis is to compute a set of clusters on Xsuch
that each cluster is monophyletic, and not a paraphyletic or polyphyletic group, andthen to represent the clusters as a rooted phylogenetic tree or network, as describedin detail in this book.
LetXbe a set of taxa. A split is any bipartitioning of Xinto two non-empty
subsets Aand BofX,s u c ht h a t A∩B=∅ and A∪B=X.A sw es h a l ls e e ,
splits arise naturally in the context of unrooted phylogenetic trees or networks.The concepts of clusters and splits are closely related: while clusters are employedto represent clades in rooted histories, splits are used to represent clades and theircomplements in unrooted settings.

2
Sequence alignment
This chapter is provided for the sake of completeness and reference. It can be skippedby readers who have a basic knowledge of phylogenetic analysis.
The comparison of biomolecular sequences is one of the most fundamental
operations in computational biology. Two DNA or protein sequences that have ahigh similarity are usually presumed to be homologous , that is, to have evolved from
a common ancestral sequence. Both high similarity and also homology of proteinsequences often imply that the structure of the proteins is similar, which in turnusually implies that the proteins have a similar function.
Phylogenetic trees and networks are generally computed from aligned DNA or
protein sequences and so the ﬁrst step in an evolutionary study is often to buildsuch an alignment.
2.1 Overview
Figure 2.1shows the relationships between some of the main concepts introduced
in this chapter. The focus of this chapter is on how to compute an alignmentof molecular sequences. We discuss how to produce a pairwise alignment of two
sequences. Then we focus on how to a compute multiple sequence alignment of a
set of sequences using a progressive alignment approach.
2.2 Pairwise sequence alignment
The basic idea of alignment is to write two sequences one above the other so asto maximize the number of similar or identical bases or amino acids that occurunderneath each other. For example, consider the two sequences a=
YEST
ERDAY and b=EASTERS . Here is one possible alignment:
a∗= YE-STERDAY
b∗= -EASTERS--
13

14 Sequence alignment
Figure 2.1 Overview of the main concepts introduced in this chapter.
and here is a second one:
a∗= YE-STERDAY
b∗= -EASTER-S-
Each of these two alignments was obtained by inserting gaps (shown as dashes) into
the two sequences, aandb,s oa st op r o d u c et w on e ws e q u e n c e so ft h es a m el e n g t h ,
a∗and b∗. It is important to note that the order of symbols in either sequence
is not changed. In consequence, removal of all gaps from an aligned sequence c∗
reproduces the original sequence c.
Deﬁnition 2.2.1 (Pairwise alignment) Suppose we are given two sequences a and b
over some alphabet /Sigma1,f o re x a m p l e /Sigma1={A,C,G,T}for DNA sequences. A pairwise
(global) alignment of a and b is obtained by inserting gaps (“ -”) into either or both
s e q u e n c e ss ot h a tt h er e s u l t i n gs e q u e n c e sa∗and b∗are of equal length and thus can
be written underneath (or “opposite”) each other in such a way that each symbol inthe one string is opposite to exactly one symbol in the other string.In a pairwise alignment of two sequences we usually require that no two dashesappear together in a column. However, if the pairwise alignment is obtained as therestriction of a multiple sequence alignment (as deﬁned in the next section) to two
sequences, then columns containing only gaps may occur.
There are two questions that we now want to consider. First, how do we score
an alignment? Second, how to compute the optimal score for two sequences andan alignment that attains that optimal score?
Given a pairwise alignment, we can either score the distance between the two
sequences, or their similarity. A popular distance measure is the edit distance that
counts the number of insertion ,deletion and replacement operations required to
convert the one sequence into the other. In an alignment of sequences aand b,
the number of insertions is given by the number of symbols in bthat are aligned
to a gap in a, the number of deletions is given by the number symbols in athat
are aligned to a gap in b, and the number of replacements is given by the number
of symbols in athat are aligned to a different symbol in b. For example, the edit
distance for the two alignments shown at the beginning of this section is 5 in bothcases.

15 2.2 Pairwise sequence alignment
Although DNA alignments are sometimes scored using the edit distance, align-
ments of molecular sequences, especially protein sequences, are usually scoredusing a similarity score based on a substitution matrix that provides a score for each
aligned pair of residues (or nucleotides):Deﬁnition 2.2.2 (Substitution matrix) Asubstitution matrix S over an alphabet
/Sigma1={y
1,y2,..., yt}of size t is a t ×t matrix in which each entry s (y,z)assigns a
score to the substitution of the symbol y by the symbol z in an alignment.For DNA sequences, we have /Sigma1={
A,C,G,T}andt=4, and the simplest possible
substitution matrix treats all nucleotides identically and assigns a score of +1t oa
pair of identical nucleotides and a score of −1 to the substitution of one nucleotide
by a different one.
There are two types of nucleotides in DNA, namely pyrimidines ,w h i c hi n c l u d e
cytosine and thymine, and purines , which include adenine and guanine. For bio-
chemical reasons, transitions , which are substitutions between two pyrimidines
or between two purines, occur more frequently than transversions ,w h i c ha r e
substitutions between a purine and a pyrimidine. A more sophisticated sub-stitution matrix for DNA will assign different scores to these different types ofsubstitutions.
A popular family of substitution matrices for amino acid sequences are the BLO-
SUM (an acronym for Blocks Substitution Matrix) matrices. These were empirically
derived from blocks , which are gap-free alignments of highly conserved regions of
proteins that are provided by the BLOCKS database [110].
T o construct such a substitution matrix from a database of aligned sequences,
one ﬁrst counts the frequency f
sof each symbol sin the database and the frequency
fs,tof each pair of aligned symbols ( s,t) in the database. The frequency fsprovides
an estimation of the probability psthat the symbol soccurs in a sequence. The
frequency fs,tprovides an estimation of the probability ps,tthat the two symbols
sand tmay substitute each other in two related sequences. Now, consider a non-
gapped alignment of the form:
a=a1a2...an
b=b1b2...bn. (2.1)
Under the null hypothesis that the two sequences are unrelated, the probability
of this alignment arising is described by a random model R :e a c hs y m b o l soccurs
independently with some probability ps, and the probability of obtaining this
alignment is given by the product:
P(a,b|R)=/productdisplay
ipai/productdisplay
jpbj. (2.2)

16 Sequence alignment
The alternative hypothesis is the match model Mthat states that the two
sequences are related (homologous). Under this model, aligned pairs of residues(s,t) occur with joint probability p
s,t. In this case, the probability for the whole
alignment is:
P(a,b|M)=/productdisplay
ipaibi. (2.3)
The ratio of these two expressions gives a measure of the relative likelihood that
the sequences are related (model M) as opposed to being unrelated (model R).
T h i sr a t i oi sc a l l e dt h e odds ratio:
P(a,b|M)
P(a,b|R)=/producttext
ipaibi/producttext
ipai/producttext
ipbi=/productdisplay
ipaibi
paipbi. (2.4)
T o obtain an additive scoring scheme, we take the logarithm to get the log-odds
ratio:
log/parenleftbiggP(a,b|M)
P(a,b|R)/parenrightbigg
=log/parenleftBigg/productdisplay
ipaibi
paipbi/parenrightBigg
=/summationdisplay
ilog/parenleftbiggpaibi
paipbi/parenrightbigg
, (2.5)
and thus the entries of the substitution matrix are given by:
s(y,z)=log/parenleftbiggpyz
pypz/parenrightbigg
, (2.6)
for each pair of symbols yand z.
Different members of the BLOSUM family of matrices were produced by consid-
ering alignments of sequences with different levels of identity. The most commonlyused matrix is BLOSUM62. T o create this matrix, sequences are clustered so that
any two sequences of ≥62% sequence identity are placed in the same cluster and all
counts are based on comparisons between pairs of sequences contained in differentclusters. The BLOSUM62 matrix is scaled so that its values are in half-bits,t h a ti s ,
the log-odds score is taken as s
/prime(y,z)=2×log2/parenleftbigpyz
pypz/parenrightbig
a n dt h e nr o u n d e dt ot h e
nearest integer, see Figure 2.2.
Substitution matrices of the type considered here are based on gap-free align-
ments and do not provide any insight into how to score the alignment of a symbolagainst a gap in an alignment. Nevertheless, gaps are considered undesirable andare thus penalized, as we now discuss.
There are two main schemes for scoring gaps in pairwise alignments. Given a
r u no fg a p so fl e n g t h g,t h e linear gap penalty scheme assigns a penalty that depends
linearly on the length gof the run, thus:
γ(g)=− gd, (2.7)
where dis a ﬁxed positive gap penalty .T h e afﬁne gap penalty scheme assigns
a slightly higher penalty to the ﬁrst gap in a run of gaps, and then penalizes

17 2.2 Pairwise sequence alignment
ARNDCQEGHILKMFPSTWYV
A 4 -1 -2 -2 0 -1 -1 0 -2 -1 -1 -1 -1 -2 -1 1 0 -3 -2 0R- 1 5 0- 2- 3 1 0- 2 0- 3- 2 2- 1- 3- 2- 1- 1- 3- 2- 3N -2 0 6 1 -3 0 0 0 1 -3 -3 0 -2 -3 -2 1 0 -4 -2 -3D- 2- 2 1 6- 3 0 2- 1- 1- 3- 4- 1- 3- 3- 1 0- 1- 4- 3- 3C 0- 3- 3- 3 9- 3- 4- 3- 3- 1- 1- 3- 1- 2- 3- 1- 1- 2- 2- 1Q - 1100 - 352 - 20 - 3 - 210 - 3 - 10 - 1 - 2 - 1 - 2E -1 0 0 2 -4 2 5 -2 0 -3 -3 1 -2 -3 -1 0 -1 -3 -2 -2G 0 -2 0 -1 -3 -2 -2 6 -2 -4 -4 -2 -3 -3 -2 0 -2 -2 -3 -3H -2 0 1 -1 -3 0 0 -2 8 -3 -3 -1 -2 -1 -2 -1 -2 -2 2 -3I -1 -3 -3 -3 -1 -3 -3 -4 -3 4 2 -3 1 0 -3 -2 -1 -3 -1 3L -1 -2 -3 -4 -1 -2 -3 -4 -3 2 4 -2 2 0 -3 -2 -1 -2 -1 1K- 1 2 0- 1- 3 1 1- 2- 1- 3- 2 5- 1- 3- 1 0- 1- 3- 2- 2M -1 -1 -2 -3 -1 0 -2 -3 -2 1 2 -1 5 0 -2 -1 -1 -1 -1 1F- 2- 3- 3- 3- 2- 3- 3- 3- 1 0 0- 3 0 6- 4- 2- 2 1 3- 1P- 1- 2- 2- 1- 3- 1- 1- 2- 2- 3- 3- 1- 2- 4 7- 1- 1- 4- 3- 2S 1 -1 1 0 -1 0 0 0 -1 -2 -2 0 -1 -2 -1 4 1 -3 -2 -2T 0- 1 0- 1- 1- 1- 1- 2- 2- 1- 1- 1- 1- 2- 1 1 5- 2- 2 0W- 3- 3- 4- 4- 2- 2- 3- 2- 2- 3- 2- 3- 1 1- 4- 3- 21 1 2- 3Y- 2- 2- 2- 3- 2- 1- 2- 3 2- 1- 1- 2- 1 3- 3- 2- 2 2 7- 1V 0 -3 -3 -3 -1 -2 -2 -3 -3 3 1 -2 1 -1 -2 -2 0 -3 -1 4
Figure 2.2 The BLOSUM62 substitution matrix. Each row and each column corresponds to one of the
twenty standard amino acids, which is indicated by its single-letter code. Positive entriesindicate substitutions that are favored in an alignment of related sequences, whereas neg-ative values indicate substitutions usually only found in random alignments.
(a)GSAQVKGHGKKVADALTNAVAHVDDMPNALSALSDLHAHKLGSAQVKGHGKK-----VA--D---A-SALSDLHAHKL
(b)GSAQVKGHGKKVADALTNAVAHVDDMPNALSALSDLHAHKLGSAQVKGHGKKVADA----------SALSDLHAHKL
Figure 2.3 (a) An alignment produced using a linear gap score, and (b) an alignment in which all gaps
occur in a single run, as produced using an affine gap score.
subsequent gaps linearly:
γ(g)=− d−(g−1)e, (2.8)
where dis called the gap open penalty and eis called the gap extension penalty , with
d>e>0, see Figure 2.3.
Exercise 2.2.3 (Scoring of alignments) Determine the score of the two alignments
presented at the beginning of Section 2.2, using the BLOSUM62 scoring matrix and a
linear gap penalty of d =4.
There are three main versions of the pairwise alignment problem. Suppose we aregiven two biomolecular sequences aandb. If they have similar length and are similar
along their whole length, then we require an alignment that extends from end-to-end; this is called a global alignment , as deﬁned above. If, on the other hand, there
is signiﬁcant similarity only over a portion of the two sequences, perhaps because

18 Sequence alignment
the two sequences contain a conserved domain, but are otherwise unrelated, thenwhat is required is an alignment that covers only the region of similarity; this iscalled a local alignment . Finally, in the context of sequence assembly, where the goal
is to assemble a longer sequence from short overlapping fragments, alignments arerequired that do not penalize gaps at either end of the alignment; these are knownasoverlap alignments .
Altogether, there are these three main variants of the pairwise alignment problem,
each of which can be combined either with the goal of minimizing distance ormaximizing similarity – using some chosen substitution matrix – and also there isthe choice of whether to use a linear or afﬁne gap penalty.
These and most other variations of the pairwise alignment problem can all be
solved efﬁciently using different variants of the same basic dynamic programmingapproach. We illustrate this for the case of computing a global alignment to max-imize a similarity score using linear gap penalties. This algorithm is known as theNeedleman-Wunsch algorithm [186].
The basic idea is to iteratively build an optimal alignment from optimal align-
ments for smaller preﬁxes of the two sequences. Suppose we are given two sequences
a=a
1a2...amand b=b1b2...bn. Also, we require a substitution matrix s(·,·)
a n dag a pp e n a l t y d>0. We shall compute a matrix
F:{0,1,2,..., m}×{ 0,1,2,..., n}→R (2.9)
in which F(i,j) equals the best score of the alignment of the two preﬁxes a1a2...ai
and b1b2...bj.
T o this end, we ﬁrst set F(0,0)=0 and then set the boundary values F(i,0)=
−i×dfori=0,1,..., mand F(0,j)=− j×dforj=0,1,..., n.T h ev a l u e
set for F(i,0) reﬂects the fact that the ﬁrst isymbols of sequence ais aligned to i
leading gaps in sequence b, for any alignment that is computed via F(i,0).
Now the rest of the matrix can be ﬁlled from top-left to bottom-right by com-
puting F(i,j)f r o m F(i−1,j−1),F(i−1,j)a n d F(i,j−1), see Figure 2.4.
There are three ways in which an alignment can be extended up to ( i,j), see
Figure 2.5:
/squaresolidaialigns to bj, leading to a score of F(i−1,j−1)+s(ai,bj),
/squaresolidaialigns to a gap, leading to a score of F(i−1,j)−d,o r
/squaresolidbjaligns to a gap, leading to a score of F(i,j−1)−d.
We obtain F(i,j) as the largest score arising from these three options:
F(i,j)=maxF(i−1,j−1)+s(a
i,bj)
F(i−1,j)−d
F(i,j−1)−d.(2.10)

19 2.2 Pairwise sequence alignment
0 b1b2... bj−1 bj ... bn
0F(0,0) |
a1 |
a2 |
|
... |
ai−1 F(i−1,j−1) (a) F(i−1,j)
/arrowsoutheast↓ (b)
ai−− − − F(i,j−1) −→ F(i,j)
(c)
...
am
Figure 2.4 Dynamic programming matrix used to compute an optimal global alignment. The value
for cell F(i,j)is computed from the values in the predecessor cells, namely (a) from
F(i−1,j−1), (b) from F(i−1,j)or (c) from F(i,j−1).
AGA ai
AG- bjAAGA ai
AG- bj-TG ai--
TGCC bj
(a)aialigns to bj(b)aialigns to a gap (c) bjaligns to a gap
Figure 2.5 The three ways in which an alignment of the prefixes a1...aiand b1...bjcan be obtained
from shorter alignments.
The ﬁnal value F(m,n) contains the score of the best global alignment between a
andb. An alignment that attains this value can be found by tracing back through the
matrix, at each cell F(i,j) moving backward to the cell F(i−1,i−j),F(i−1,j)
orF(i,j−1) that was used to set the value at F(i,j). In each of these cases, we
report a match between symbols aiand bj,t h ea l i g n m e n to f aiagainst a gap, or
the alignment of a gap against bj, respectively.
Note that in the case of a tie, in which the value of a cell can be obtained in more
than one way from a previous cell, different choices lead to different alignments ofthe same score.Exercise2.2.4 (Application of Needleman-Wunsch) Apply the Needleman-Wunsch
algorithm to the two sequences a =
YEASTS and b =EASTERS , using the
BLOSUM 62matrix and a gap penalty of d =3.
A similar approach, called the Smith-Waterman algorithm , can be used to compute
a local alignment between two sequences [ 218], and a simple modiﬁcation leads
to an algorithm for overlap alignments. All these algorithms, including furthermodiﬁcations to accommodate afﬁne gap penalties, run in time that is in proportion

20 Sequence alignment
a1CAGGATTAG
a2CAGGTTTAG
a3CATTTTAG
a4ACGTTAA
a5ATGTTAAa∗
1CAGGATTAG
a∗
2CAGGTTTAG
a∗
3CA-TTTTAG
a∗
4-ACG-TTAA
a∗
5-ATG-TTAA
(a) Sequences (b) Multiple alignment
Figure 2.6 (a) A collection of DNA sequences A=(a1,..., a5)and (b) a corresponding multiple
sequence alignment M=(a∗
1,..., a∗
5).
to the product of the lengths of the two sequences (that is, in O(mn)) and can be
modiﬁed further to require only linear space.
2.3 Multiple sequence alignment
In phylogenetics, a set of taxa X={x1,..., xn}is often represented by a collection
of molecular sequences, A=(a1,..., an), where the i-th sequence aiwas obtained
from taxon xiand corresponds to some speciﬁc gene or locus. For phylogenetic
analysis, care is taken to ensure that the sequences are homologous, that is, haveevolved from a common ancestor sequence.
The sequences in Adiffer from each other due to evolutionary events such
as insertions, deletions and mutations. T o facilitate phylogenetic analysis, thesesequences are usually aligned by inserting gaps into each sequence such that theresulting collection of sequences
M=a
∗
11 a∗
12... a∗
1m
a∗
21 a∗
22... a∗
2m
...
a∗
n1a∗
n2... a∗
nm(2.11)
all have the same length m, forming a multiple sequence alignment of length m,s e e
Figure 2.6. We are particularly interested in ﬁnding a multiple sequence alignment
that achieves an optimal score according to an appropriate scoring scheme.
As discussed in the previous section, a pairwise sequence alignment of amino
acid sequences is usually scored with the help of a substitution matrix such as aBLOSUM matrix, which assigns an empirically derived score to each pair of alignedamino acids; positive for favorable substitutions and negative for unfavorable ones.The score of the whole alignment is given by the sum of scores for each pair ofaligned characters.
Multiple sequence alignments are usually scored using the sum of pairs approach:
the score of a multiple sequence alignment is given by the sum of scores of all

21 2.3 Multiple sequence alignment
Figure 2.7 Outline of the progressive alignment approach. For a given set of input sequences (a), a
distance matrix is computed (b), and from this a phylogenetic guide tree is derived (c).
Then, sequences at the leaves of the tree are aligned to produce profiles at the internalnodes of the tree, which in turn are aligned to each other, continuing in this manner untilthe final alignment of all sequences is obtained at the root of the guide tree (d).
pairwise alignments induced by pairs of sequences in the multiple sequence align-ment. The problem of computing a multiple sequence alignment that optimizesthe sum of pairs score is known to be computationally hard [ 240] and thus, in
practice, heuristics such as progressive alignment are used.
The basic idea of progressive alignment is to build a multiple sequence alignment
incrementally, or progressively , by ﬁrst aligning pairs of similar sequences, and then
aligning sequences to proﬁles ( i nt h i sc o n t e x t ,a proﬁle is simply a multiple sequence
alignment of a subset of the input sequences) and then ﬁnally aligning proﬁles withproﬁles to obtain a multiple sequence alignment of the total set of input sequences,see Figure 2.7.
One of the most popular implementations of this approach is ClustalW [ 235].
In a basic outline, ﬁrst all/parenleftbig
n
2/parenrightbig
pairwise alignments of the ninput sequences are
computed to produce distances between all pairs of taxa. Second, these distances areprovided as input to the neighbor-joining tree reconstruction method, describedlater in Section 3.14,t ob u i l dap h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e T, which is called the guide tree .
Third, in a postorder traversal of the guide-tree, all sequences are progressivelyaligned so as to obtain the ﬁnal alignment.

22 Sequence alignment
Exercise 2.3.1 (Multiple sequence alignment) Given the multiple sequence align-
ment
YE-STERDAY-EASTER-S-YEAST-----
determine the score of the alignment, using the BLOSUM 62scoring matrix and a
linear gap penalty of 4.
Deﬁnition2.3.2 (Characters in a multiple sequence alignment) Let M be a multiple
sequence alignment on X. Each column of M is called a character and each symbol
that occurs in such a column is called a character state .
We use Mito denote the character at the i-th column of M.F o re x a m p l e ,i nt h e
multiple sequence alignment shown in Figure 2.6the ﬁrst character M1takes on
the character state Cin the ﬁrst three sequences, and takes on the gapcharacter
state in the last two.
More recent multiple sequence alignment programs, such as T-Coffee [ 188]o r
Muscle [66], use more reﬁned heuristics and have been shown to produce better
alignments than ClustalW.
Chapter notes
Most of the content of this chapter is based on teaching notes from our course onAlgorithms in Bioinformatics taught at T ¨ubingen University in recent years. Those
notes, in turn, are based on the cited papers and on the book “Biological SequenceAnalysis” by Durbin and colleagues [ 64].

3
Phylogenetic trees
This chapter is provided for the sake of completeness and reference. It can be skippedby readers who have a basic knowledge of phylogenetic analysis.Phylogenetic analysis aims at uncovering the evolutionary relationships betweendifferent species or taxa, to obtain an understanding of the evolution of life onEarth. Phylogenetic trees are widely used to address this task and are usuallycomputed from molecular sequences. They also have applications in many otherareas. For example, they are used to determine the age and rate of diversiﬁcation oftaxa, to understand the evolutionary history of gene families, in sequence-analysismethods to allow phylogenetic footprinting , in epidemiology to trace the origin
and transmission of infectious diseases, or to study the co-evolution of hosts andparasites.
The main focus of this book is on phylogenetic networks. However, as phy-
logenetic trees generalize to phylogenetic networks and also to make the bookreasonably self-contained, in this chapter we give a brief introduction to some ofthe main methods used to infer phylogenetic trees.
3.1 Overview
Figure 3.1shows the relationships between some of the main concepts introduced
in this chapter. The focus of this chapter is on how to compute unrooted phyloge-
netic trees . Usually, the process of phylogenetic inference is begun with a multiple
sequence alignment . From this, one can pursue either a distance-based analysis, or
a sequenced-based one.
In a distance-based analysis of DNA sequences, ﬁrst the Hamming distances
between pairs of sequences are computed. These distances are then exposed toadistance correction that is based on some appropriate model of evolution .T h e
resulting distance matrix is then provided to a method such as UPGMA, neighbor-
joining orFastME, to produce an unrooted phylogenetic tree. The latter two are both
23

24 Phylogenetic trees
Figure 3.1 Overview of the main concepts introduced in this chapter. In this diagram, data “flows” from
bottom to top.
heuristics for computing the balanced minimum evolution (BME) tree. Distance
methods are often applied to distance matrices obtained in other ways, too.
For a sequence-based analysis, there are three main types of approaches to choose
from. A maximum parsimony method searches for a phylogenetic tree that explains
the given dataset using a minimum number of observable mutations. A maximum
likelihood approach aims at determining a tree that maximizes the likelihood of
generating the given dataset, under a given model of evolution. Bayesian methodsattempt to compute the posterior distribution of trees, based on the given input data,
a speciﬁed model of evolution and a presumed prior distribution of phylogenetictrees.
The posterior distribution provided by a Bayesian method provides a means of
evaluating the support of computed groups of taxa. For other methods, bootstrap-
ping can be used to perform such evaluations.
3.2 Phylogenetic trees
Aphylogenetic tree on Xis obtained by labeling the leaves of a tree T(a connected
graph with no cycles, see Deﬁnition 1.3.1)b yt h et a x o ns e t X, as illustrated in
Figure 3.2.
Using the terminology introduced in Chapter 1, we refer to the constituents of a
phylogenetic tree as nodes and edges , but remark that edges are also called branches
in the context of phylogenetic trees.

25 3.2 Phylogenetic trees
blue whale
cat
chicken
cow
gorilla
gray seal
human
mouse
opossum
rat+ ⇒
(a) Taxa (b) Tree (c) Phylogenetic tree
Figure 3.2 A set of taxa X(a), here a set of mammals and chicken, are used to label the leaves of a
tree (b), giving rise to a phylogenetic tree TonX, shown in (c).
We use λto denote the taxon labeling that maps each taxon x∈Xonto some
nodevofT.I fλ( x)=v, then we say something like vis labeled by x ,o rv obtains
the label x . We always assume that all leaves of the given tree Tobtain some label
viaλand we usually assume that internal nodes remain unlabeled and that no
leaf obtains more than one label. Moreover, we usually require that all nodes havedegree /negationslash=2:
Deﬁnition 3.2.1 (Phylogenetic tree) Given a set of taxa X,aphylogenetic tree T
onXconsists of a tree T =(V,E), in which all nodes have degree /negationslash=2, together with
a taxon labeling λ:X→V that assigns exactly one taxon to every leaf and none to
any internal node.Note that we usually abuse notation in this way to let Tdenote both a phylogenetic
tree and also the graph-theoretical tree on which it is based.
In mathematical phylogeny, the more general concept of an X-tree is sometimes
considered, which is obtained by weakening the requirements imposed on the tree,by allowing nodes of degree 2, and by weakening the requirements imposed on thetaxon labeling λ, so as to demand only that every node of degree 0 or 2 obtains at
least one label, thus allowing (multiple) labels on both leaves and internal nodes[216 ].
Our focus is on phylogenetic trees , rather than X-trees (and then later on phy-
logenetic networks , rather than X-networks ), for ease of exposition. This is not a
limitation, as any X-tree can be converted into a corresponding phylogenetic tree
simply by introducing a new leaf for every taxon that appears as the label of aninternal node, or as the label of a leaf node that is labeled by more than one taxon,as illustrated in Figure 3.3.
As discussed in the previous chapter, trees can be either unrooted orrooted ,a n d
these two deﬁnitions carry over to phylogenetic trees (and X-trees). Although we

26 Phylogenetic trees
Figure 3.3 (a) An X-tree in which some internal nodes have labels, cand d, and one node has multiple
labels, gand h. (b) The corresponding phylogenetic tree obtained by introducing one new
leaf edge for each of the taxa c,d,gand h.
usually forbid nodes of degree 2 in phylogenetic trees, in a rooted phylogenetic treewe allow the root to be of degree 2:
Deﬁnition 3.2.2 (Rooted phylogenetic tree) Given a set of taxa X,arooted phylo-
genetic tree consists of a rooted tree T =(V,E,ρ)and a taxon labeling λ:X→V
that assigns exactly one taxon to every leaf and none to any internal node. All nodes,except ρ,m u s th a v ed e g r e e /negationslash=2.
Figure 3.2c shows an example of an unrooted phylogenetic tree. From a theoretical
and algorithmic point of view, unrooted phylogenetic trees are sometimes easierto work with than rooted ones. However, in biology, rooted phylogenetic treesare usually of more interest, as the placement of the root deﬁnes a direction oftime along the phylogenetic tree, namely away from the root, and because rootedphylogenetic trees explicitly deﬁne clades or clusters of putatively related taxa.
An unrooted phylogenetic tree can be rooted simply by declaring one of its
nodes to be the root, or by inserting a new root node into the interior of oneof the edges of the tree. In practice, a popular way to determine where to root a
phylogenetic tree is by using an outgroup . An outgroup is a taxon that is closely
related to the main group of taxa under consideration, but lies outside of it. Theroot is placed on the edge leading to the outgroup. In Figure 3.4,w es h o war o o t e d
version of the example depicted in Figure 3.2, which is rooted using the outgroup
chicken .
Exercise3.2.3 (Rooting an unrooted tree) What is the number of rooted phylogenetic
trees that can be obtained by rooting the unrooted tree depicted in Figure 3.3bi na l l
possible ways?In many cases, the edges of a phylogenetic tree are each assigned a weight ,o rlength ,
which often indicates the number of mutations that have happened along an edgeor is correlated to evolutionary time in some other way:

27 3.3 The number of phylogenetic trees
Figure 3.4 A rooted phylogenetic tree on mammals; the position of the root was determined by the
outgroup chicken.
Figure 3.5 A rooted phylogenetic tree on mammals in which the edge lengths represent the number of
differences observed in the mtDNA sequence of the species. In this type of diagram, calleda phylogram, only the horizontal portion of an edge represents length (see Chapter 13for
further details).
Deﬁnition 3.2.4 (Edge weights) A phylogenetic tree T is called an edge-weighted
tree if we are given a map ωthat assigns a non-negative weight orlength ω(e)to
e v e r ye d g eeo ft h et r e e .Note that assigning a length of 0 to an edge is equivalent to contracting the edge. Indrawings, the weights of edges in a phylogenetic tree are often indicated by drawingthe edges to scale, rather than writing the lengths explicitly next to the edges, seeFigure 3.5.
3.3 The number of phylogenetic trees
How fast does the number of possible different phylogenetic trees Tgrow as a
function of n, the size of the given taxon set X?
Let us ﬁrst determine the number of nodes and edges in a phylogenetic tree T
onntaxa. T o make the calculations easier, we shall assume that Tis bifurcating,
noting that a non-bifurcating tree has fewer nodes and edges.
Any bifurcating, unrooted phylogenetic tree on n=4 taxa has 6 nodes and
5e d g e s ,s e eF i g u r e3.6. Suppose n>4. Then Tcan be clearly obtained from a

28 Phylogenetic trees
Figure 3.6 A bifurcating unrooted phylogenetic tree on four taxa.
Figure 3.7 All possible ways of adding a fourth taxon dto an unrooted phylogenetic tree on three taxa
{a,b,c}.
bifurcating phylogenetic tree T/primeonn−1 taxa by inserting a new node vinto some
edge eofT/primeand connecting vto a new leaf w. This increases both the number
of nodes and the number of edges in T/primeby 2. Hence, by induction, Thas 2 n−2
nodes and 2 n−3e d g e s .
Now we can address the problem of counting the number of bifurcating phy-
logenetic trees on ntaxa. If n=3, then there is clearly one such tree. By adding
a new leaf to any of the edges in this tree we obtain all three possible bifurcatingphylogenetic trees on 4 taxa, see Figure 3.7. Similarly, adding a new leaf to any edge
of any of these three trees we obtain all 3 ×5 bifurcating phylogenetic trees on
5 taxa, etc.
In general, we can obtain every bifurcating phylogenetic tree on ntaxa by
adjoining a new leaf and edge to some bifurcating phylogenetic tree T
/primeon the ﬁrst
n−1 taxa, in exactly one way. Since any such phylogenetic tree T/primehas 2(n −1)−
3=2n−5 edges, it follows that there are
U(n)=(2n−5)!!=3·5·7····· (2n−5) (3.1)
different bifurcating phylogenetic trees on ntaxa.
The function U(n)g r o w sv e r yr a p i d l yw i t hn . For example, U(10)≈2m i l l i o n
and U(20)≈2.2×1020. This makes exhaustive strategies for inferring phyloge-
netic trees infeasible for datasets involving more than 10–12 taxa, say.Exercise 3.3.1 (Counting trees) What is the number of different bifurcating rooted
phylogenetic trees on n taxa? Are there more or fewer trees if multifurcations areallowed? Are there more or fewer trees if we do not distinguish the labels?

29 3.4 Models of DNA evolution
3.4 Models of DNA evolution
How do sequences evolve? As we shall see, a model of evolution is required bytree reconstruction methods that aim at determining the best tree for explaining agiven set of sequences. T o give a basic understanding of such models, in this sectionwe discuss the Jukes-Cantor model of evolution [ 144], which describes a simple
scenario in which sequences evolve via mutations and speciation, see also [230].
The main idea is to start with a random DNA sequence placed at the root of
a rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic tree. This sequence is then evolved along the
tree: mutations are applied to the sequences along the edges of the tree, whereasspeciation events are implicitly given by the tree as the bifurcations at internalnodes. There are no insertion or deletion events and thus all sequences producedunder this model have the same length.Deﬁnition 3.4.1 (Jukes-Cantor model) Let T
0be a rooted phylogenetic tree, called
themodel tree . The Jukes-Cantor model of evolution makes the following assumptions:
(i)The possible states for each site are A,C,GandT.
(ii)The sequence length is an input parameter and the state of each site of the initialsequence at the root is drawn independently and uniformly at random from theset of possible states.
(iii) The sites evolve identically and independently (that is, all sites evolve following
the same rules, but independently of each other) along the edges of the tree T
0
from the root ρat a ﬁxed rate u.
(iv) With each edge f ∈E we associate a duration τ(f)and the expected number of
mutations per site along f is given by u τ(f). The probabilities of change to each
of the three remaining states are equal.
How does a site “evolve along” an edge funder the Jukes-Cantor model? Consider
as i t e ithat has nucleotide P∈{A,C,G,T}a tt h es o u r c eo fe d g e f,h o wd o e so n e
determine the base Q∈{A,C,G,T}at the target node of f?
Under the Jukes-Cantor model, the evolutionary event C3=t h en u c l e o t i d ea t
site i changes to one of the other three bases occurs at a ﬁxed rate u.H e n c e ,t h ee v e n t
C4=nucleotide changes to any base (including “changing to the same base”) can
be taken to be4
3u=4u
3. The probability that event C4does not occur within time
tfollows a Poisson distribution with parameter k=0a n di sg i v e nb y e−4
3ut.S o ,
the probability that C4does occur in time tequals (1 −e−4
3ut). When the event C4
occurs, the probability of ending in any particular base is1
4.
This implies that the probability that an event of type C4occurs and changes
from a given base P∈{A,C,G,T}to some speciﬁc base Qwithin time tis:
Prob( Q|P,t)=1
4/parenleftBig
1−e−4
3ut/parenrightBig
. (3.2)

30 Phylogenetic trees
ACGTTTAGAG
ACCTTGCGGGACGTTTCGAG
Figure 3.8 Under the Jukes-Cantor model of evolution, a random DNA sequence is generated at the
root of the tree (underlined) and is then evolved along a model tree (in the direction ofthe arrows), for example giving rise to the two other sequences shown here. Each edge e
of the tree is labeled by its duration τ(e).
The probability that P=Qafter time tis given by the sum of Prob( Q=P|
P,t) and the probability that C4does not occur:
Prob( Q=P|P,t)=1
4/parenleftBig
1−e−4
3ut/parenrightBig
+e−4
3ut=1
4/parenleftBig
1+3e−4
3ut/parenrightBig
.(3.3)
Thus, we obtain a probability-of-change formula for the probability of an observ-
able change occurring at any given site in time t:
Prob(change |t)=1−Prob( Q=P|P,t)
=1−1
4/parenleftBig
1+3e−4
3ut/parenrightBig
=3
4/parenleftBig
1−e−4
3ut/parenrightBig
. (3.4)
So, when a sequence evolves along an edge f, the probability that the two sequences
at the opposite ends of fdiffer at position idepends on the mutation rate uand
the duration t=τ(f), and is given by the probability-of-change formula.
In Figure 3.8we show a simple example in which the sequence at the root of
the tree (underlined), evolves along the tree in the direction of the arrows. Forexample, assuming a mutation rate of u=0.1, the probability of change along the
edge marked “ ∗” , which has duration 3, is given by
3
4/parenleftBig
1−e−4
3×0.1×3/parenrightBig
=3
4(1−e−0.4)≈0.247. (3.5)
Exercise 3.4.2 (Probability of change, mutation rate) With the tree of Figure 3.8
and a mutation rate of u =0.1, what is the probability that the ﬁrst character of the
sequence at leaf a is the same as the ﬁrst character of the sequence at the root?

31 3.4 Models of DNA evolution
JC “Jukes-Cantor”
[144]
F81 “Felsenstein 81”
[73]
K2P “Kimura 2-Parameter”
[148]
K3SP “Kimura 3-Parameter”
[149]
HKY “Hasegawa-Kishino-Yano”
[103]
F84 “Felsenstein 84”
[78]
T rN “Tamura-Nei”
[232]
SYM “Symmetric”
[247]
GTR “General Time Reversible”
[158, 205]
Figure 3.9 A classification of the most important DNA models. Starting with the simple Jukes-Cantor
model, more general models can be obtained by allowing unequal base frequencies or morethan one substitution parameter. The most general model of this type is the GTR modelthat allows unequal base frequencies and prescribes a different substitution parameter foreach of the six pairs of different bases.
In summary, the Jukes-Cantor model of DNA evolution assumes that all four bases(
A,C,GandT) occur with equal frequencies ( =0.25) and that changes from one
base to another occur at the same rate between all bases. There are many ways torelax these conditions to obtain more general models. For example, if we let thebases occur with different and arbitrary frequencies (although they have to sumto 1), and allow two different rates of change, one for transitions (that is, changesbetween
AandGor between CandT) and a second one for transversions (all
other changes), then we obtain the so-called Hasegawa-Kishino-Yano model .B o t h
the Jukes-Cantor model and the Hasegawa-Kishino-Y ano model are special casesof the general time reversible model ,s e eF i g u r e 3.9.
Another important way to obtain more general models of DNA evolution is
to allow different substitution rates at different positions in the sequence. Forexample, this is often done by deﬁning a discrete collection of rate classes using aGamma distribution , which is popular because it has one main parameter, α,t h a t
determines the shape of the distribution [246 ]. When α< 1, then the distribution
is exponentially shaped and asymptotic to both the vertical and horizontal axes.When α=1, then the result is an exponential distribution. For α> 1, the Gamma
distribution assumes a unimodal, but skewed shape.

32 Phylogenetic trees
3.5 The phylogenetic tree reconstruction problem
A main goal of phylogenetic analysis is to reconstruct the phylogenetic tree alongwhich a given set of species has evolved. In nearly all cases, there is no way to verifywhether a given phylogenetic tree represents the true tree along which sequences
or species actually evolved. Thus, the problem is usually addressed indirectly, asfollows.
First, a model of sequence evolution is developed for which one hopes that it covers
the most important aspects of the evolution of the taxa under consideration. Suchmodels may be a simple modiﬁcation of the Jukes-Cantor model, obtained, forexample, by adding a difference in nucleotide composition, say, or can be quitesubstantial modiﬁcations, obtained, for example, by adding dependencies betweendifferent sites in the sequence.
Then, a tree reconstruction method is used that is known to perform well for
sequences that have evolved under the given model.
In practice, there is a trade-off that needs to be taken into account: a more
simple model of evolution is usually computationally less expensive and requiresless data to get a robust result, whereas a more elaborate model of evolution isusually computationally more expensive and requires more data. However, a moredetailed model should provide more reliable results. On the other hand, the varianceof the solution increases with more parameters.
An important property of any such model of evolution is that it be identiﬁ-
able, meaning that, in the idealized situation that the sequences under consider-
ation have inﬁnite length, it must, in principle, allow one to determine preciselywhich model tree a given set of sequences was generated on. When identiﬁabilityfails, this is because the same set of sequences can be generated with the sameprobability on two different model trees. Simple models, such as the Jukes-Cantormodel, are usually identiﬁable. As models become more realistic or complex, caremust be taken not to lose identiﬁability. In current research, mathematicians areinterested in designing models that are as general as possible, while still beingidentiﬁable.
How well any phylogenetic tree can be reconstructed from sequences depends
on the length of the sequences provided. For identiﬁable models, an impor-tant concept is statistical consistency : a tree reconstruction method is called sta-
tistically consistent with respect to a given (identiﬁable) model of evolution, if
it is guaranteed to correctly reconstruct the phylogenetic tree from sequencesthat evolved along that phylogenetic tree under the model, given long enoughsequences.
There exist many different approaches to the tree reconstruction problem [ 77].
These are usually classiﬁed into two main groups:

33 3.7 Maximum parsimony
/squaresolidSequence-based methods usually search for a phylogenetic tree Tthat optimally
explains a given multiple sequence alignment M.
/squaresolidDistance-based methods usually construct a phylogenetic tree Tf r o mag i v e n
distance matrix D.
We discuss some of the most important methods in the following sections.
3.6 Sequence-based methods
The ﬁrst main group of tree reconstruction methods are called sequence-based
methods . In this type of approach, the input consists of a multiple sequence align-
ment MonXa n dap h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e Tis determined for M, usually by performing
a search in tree space to ﬁnd an optimal phylogenetic tree or trees.
In the following, we discuss three main approaches: maximum parsimony [67],
maximum likelihood [68], and Bayesian inference [119].
3.7 Maximum parsimony
The maximum parsimony method is one of the most widely used sequence-based
tree reconstruction methods. In science, the principle of maximum parsimony can
be stated as a preference for the least complex explanation for an observation. Inphylogenetic analysis, the maximum parsimony problem is to ﬁnd a phylogenetic
tree that explains a given set of aligned sequences using a minimum number ofevolutionary events .
In the simplest form of this approach, the evolutionary events to be mini-
mized are nucleotide mutations. In this context, the difference between two aligned
sequences x=(x
1,..., xm)a n d y=(y1,..., ym) is given by the number of posi-
tions at which they differ,
diff( x,y)=| { i|xi/negationslash=yi}|, (3.6)
which is also known as the (unnormalized) Hamming distance .
Suppose we are given a multiple alignment of sequences M=(a1,a2,..., an)o f
length mand a corresponding phylogenetic tree TonX. If we assign a hypothetical
ancestral sequence of length mto every internal node in T, then we can obtain a
score for Ttogether with this assignment, by summing over all differences diff( x,y)
between any two sequences xand ythat are assigned to the two ends of some edge
inT. The minimum value obtainable in this way is called the parsimony score
PS(T,M)o fTand M:
Deﬁnition 3.7.1 (Parsimony score of a tree) Suppose we are given a multiple
sequence alignment M of length m and a corresponding phylogenetic tree T on X.

34 Phylogenetic trees
The parsimony score of T and M is deﬁned as:
PS(T,M)=min
α/summationdisplay
{x,y}diff( x,y), (3.7)
where the minimum is taken over all possible assignments αofhypothetical ancestor
sequences of length m to the internal nodes of T and the sum is taken over all pairs ofsequences x ,y that are assigned to opposite ends of some edge f of T.
3.7.1 The small parsimony problem
The task of computing PS(T,M)i sk n o w na st h e small parsimony problem .T h i s
problem can be solved efﬁciently by the Fitch algorithm [79] if the phylogenetic
trees considered are bifurcating and mismatches between different character statesare all weighted equally. For trees with multifurcations, a generalization of thisalgorithm, called the Fitch-Hartigan algorithm [101 ] can be used. In even more
general settings, for example, when changes between different states are weighteddifferently, Sankoff’s algorithm can be applied [ 210] in a modiﬁcation of (3.7).
T o give a ﬂavor of such algorithms, we describe the Fitch algorithm. The Fitch
algorithm requires that the given phylogenetic tree has a root of outdegree two.However, as the placement of the root does not inﬂuence the achievable score, thisrequirement can be met by simply inserting a root into an arbitrary edge of theinput tree, if necessary.
Assume that we are given a multiple sequence alignment Mand a bifurcating
(rooted) phylogenetic tree TonX. We score each character (that is, column of the
alignment) separately and then obtain the parsimony score PS(T,M) by summing
over all characters.
Consider a ﬁxed character c. The algorithm proceeds in two passes. In a bottom-
up pass,e a c hn o d e vof the tree is labeled by a set of character states S(v)i nap o s t -
order traversal of the tree, as follows: First, each leaf is assigned the character-stateassociated with the given taxon represented by the leaf. Now, consider some internalnodevwith children w
1andw2.W es e t S(v)=S(w1)∩S(w2), if the intersection
ofS(w1)a n d S(w2)i sn o n - e m p t y ,a n do t h e r w i s ew es e t S(v)=S(w1)∪S(w2).
The parsimony score for the tree Tand the character cequals the number of times
that the union operation is performed in the bottom-up pass.
T o produce a labeling αof the internal nodes of Tby character-states that attains
the optimal score computed by the bottom-up pass, a top-down pass is performed
that starts at the root and then proceeds in a preorder traversal toward the leavesof the tree: First, an arbitrary character state α(ρ)∈S(ρ) is chosen for the root
nodeρ. Then, for every child wof a node vwe set its label α(w)t oα (v), if
α(v)∈S(w), and otherwise we choose an arbitrary character state from S(w).

35 3.7 Maximum parsimony
The Fitch algorithm runs in time proportional to the length of the align-
ment times the number of taxa. The bottom-up pass computes the optimal score
PS(T,M) .T h et o p - d o w np a s sp r o v i d e sa tl e a s to n el a b e l i n g αthat attains that
score, but cannot be used to generate all possible optimal labellings.Exercise3.7.2 (Fitch algorithm) Construct an example for which the Fitch algorithm
c a n n o tb eu s e dt og e n e r a t eall possible optimal labellings.
3.7.2 The large parsimony problem
N o wt h a tw ek n o wh o wt od e t e r m i n et h ep a r s i m o n ys c o r eo nag i v e np h y l o g e n e t i ctree, let us look at the problem of computing the following value:Deﬁnition 3.7.3 (Parsimony score of an alignment) Given a multiple sequence
alignment M =(a
1,..., an)onX,i t sparsimony score is deﬁned as
PS(M)=min{ PS(T,M)|T is a phylogenetic tree on X}. (3.8)
The task of computing PS(M)i sk n o w na st h e large parsimony problem .P o t e n -
tially, we need to consider all (2 n−5)!! possible unrooted phylogenetic trees.
Unfortunately, it is most probably not possible to ﬁnd a solution much faster, asthe maximum parsimony problem is known to be NP-hard.
3.7.3 Branch-and-bound approach
Recall how we obtained an expression for the number U(n) of unrooted phylo-
genetic tree topologies on a set of ntaxaX={x1,x2,..., xn}: Starting with the
unique phylogenetic tree with 3 leaves, there are three ways of adding an extraedge with a new leaf to obtain a phylogenetic tree on 4 taxa. This new phylogenetictree has (2 n−3)=5 edges. Hence, there are 5 ways to obtain a new phylogenetic
tree with 5 leaves, and so forth.
More precisely, we can obtain any tree T
i+1on{x1,..., xi,xi+1}by adding an
extra edge with a leaf labeled xi+1to some (unique) tree Tion{x1,..., xi}.H e n c e ,
we can construct the set of allpossible trees on ntaxa by adding one leaf at a time
in all possible ways, thus systematically generating a complete enumeration tree of
the trees.
LetM=(a1,..., an) be a multiple sequence alignment on X.As i m p l e ,b u t
crucial observation in the setting of maximum parsimony is that if we add a newtaxon x
i+1to a phylogenetic tree Tito obtain a new phylogenetic tree Ti+1then the
parsimony score of Ti+1can only be equal to, or worse than, the parsimony score
ofTi.
This gives us a way to bound the search through the complete enumeration tree
[109 ]: If the local parsimony score of the current incomplete tree T/primeis worse than

36 Phylogenetic trees
A
AAC
C
Figure 3.10 The parsimony score of this tree is 1for the indicated character states.
A
AC
A
ACCA
ACCA
AC
C
local =1≤global local =2global local =2global
continue don’ t continue don’ t continue
Figure 3.11 In branch-and-bound, we first consider all three ways of adding a fourth taxon a4to a
phylogenetic tree Ton{a1,a2,a3}. The local parsimony score of the resulting subtrees is
compared with the best global parsimony score found so far (equal to 1, in this example)to decide which subtrees merit further inspection.
the best global score for any complete tree seen so far, then we do not need to
generate the enumeration subtree below T/prime.
In practice, using this branch-and-bound strategy, one can obtain exact solutions
for datasets of 20 or slightly more sequences, depending on the sequence lengthand complexity of the data. In general, a good starting strategy is to ﬁrst computean initial phylogenetic tree T
0for the data, e.g. using the neighbor-joining method
(described in Section 3.14) ,a n dt h e nt oi n i t i a l i z et h e global bound to the parsimony
score of T0.
As an example, suppose we have a multiple sequence alignment
M=(a1,a2,..., a5) of length one, and the characters are a1=A,a2=A,
a3=C,a4=C,a n d a5=A. Assume that the initial phylogenetic tree on Mis as
shown in Figure 3.10, which gives a global upper bound of 1 for position i.T h eﬁ r s t
step in generating the enumeration tree is shown in Figure 3.11. Only the ﬁrst of the
three trees fulﬁlls the bound criterion and so we do not generate any further treesfrom the other two trees. The second step in generating the enumeration tree iss h o w ni nF i g u r e 3.12.T h eﬁ r s tt h r e et r e e sa r eo p t i m a l .N o t et h a tt h eb o u n dc r i t e r i o n
in the ﬁrst step reduced the number of full trees to be considered by two thirds.

37 3.8 Branch-swapping methods
A
ACC
A
ACC AA
ACCA
A
ACCA
A
ACCA
A
ACC A
local =1 local =1 local =1 local =2 local =2
Figure 3.12 The five different phylogenetic trees obtained by adding a fifth taxon with character state A.
3.7.4 Stepwise addition and star-decomposition heuristics
We now discuss a simple greedy heuristic for approximating the maximum parsi-mony tree called the stepwise-addition heuristic [73]. As in the branch-and-bound
method, we build a phylogenetic tree Tby adding one leaf after the other, however,
in each step we choose an optimal position for adding in the new leaf-edge.
More precisely, given a multiple sequence alignment M=(a
1,a2,..., an)o n
X={x1,..., xn}, we start with a phylogenetic tree T2that has two leaves labeled
x1and x2. Now suppose that at step iwe have constructed a phylogenetic tree Ti
for the ﬁrst itaxa ( x1,x2,..., xi). Then, for each edge einTiwe consider a new
phylogenetic tree Te
ithat is obtained by inserting a new node vineand joining it
v i aan e we d g e fto a new leaf wwith label xi+1. We choose the tree with the best
p a r s i m o n ys c o r e ,t h a ti sw es e t Ti+1=arg min
e{PS(Te
i,M)}.
An alternative approach is the star-decomposition heuristic .I nt h i ss t r a t e g y ,w e
start with the star tree on all ntaxa that has one internal node and nleaf nodes. At
each step, the optimality criterion is evaluated for every possible tree obtained bypulling out a pair of edges incident to the central node. The best tree found at onestep is then used as the basis of the next step, as indicated in Figure 3.13.
Whereas the branch-and-bound approach is guaranteed to ﬁnd an optimal
solution, the stepwise-addition and star-decomposition heuristics are not and theresult that they produce depends on the order in which the sequences are processedor ties are resolved.
3.8 Branch-swapping methods
LetM=(a1,..., an) be a multiple sequence alignment on X. An important and
widely-used heuristic approach to solving the large parsimony problem on M,a n d
also other optimization problems on phylogenetic trees, is to explore the space ofbifurcating phylogenetic trees on X.T h i si sd o n eb ym o v i n gf r o mo n ep h y l o g e n e t i c

38 Phylogenetic trees
...
Figure 3.13 In the star-decomposition heuristic, one repeatedly pairs off two edges that are incident to
the central node that provide the best improvement of the parsimony score, until a resolvedphylogenetic tree is obtained.
(a) Phylogenetic tree (b) One NNI tree (c) Other NNI tree
Figure 3.14 Nearest neighbor interchange (NNI). (a) An unrooted phylogenetic tree T. The four subtrees
attached to the two ends of the edge marked “ ∗” can be interchanged in four different ways,
leading to two distinct phylogenetic trees, shown in (b) and (c).
tree Tto another T/primeby applying a branch-swapping operation that rearranges a
part of T.
More precisely, the idea is to generate a number of neighboring phylogenetic
t r e e si nt h i sw a ya n dt h e nt om o v et ot h eo n et h a th a st h eb e s tp a r s i m o n ys c o r e .This is repeated a number of times until no further improvement can be achieved.
The simplest branch-swapping operation is the nearest neighbor interchange
(NNI) [178, 203], in which two of four subtrees that are attached to a common
edge are swapped in one of two possible ways, as illustrated in Figure 3.14.
Am o r eg e n e r a lb r a n c h - s w a p p i n gm e t h o di sc a l l e d subtree prune and regraft
(SPR) , in which a subtree is pruned from the given phylogenetic tree and re-grafted
at a different location of the phylogenetic tree, as shown in Figure 3.15 [191].

39 3.8 Branch-swapping methods
(a) Phylogenetic tree (b) Subtree prune. . . (c) and regraft
Figure 3.15 Subtree prune and regraft (SPR). (a) An unrooted phylogenetic tree T. The subtree consisting
of three edges and the two leaves labeled aand bis pruned at the location marked “ ∗”t o
produce the two subtrees shown in (b), and then reattached into the edge leading to theleaf labeled f(c).
(a) Tree bisection... (b) reconnection choice... (c) and reconnection
Figure 3.16 Tree bisection and reconnection (TBR). The phylogenetic tree Tshown in (a) is bisected
into two subtrees by deleting the edge marked “ ∗”. As illustrated in (b), one possible choice
is to reattach the two subtrees by a new edge joining the middles of the two leaf edgesassociated with taxa band f. The resulting new phylogenetic tree is shown in (c).
The most general branch-swapping method considered here is called tree bisec-
tion and reconnection (TBR) . T o apply this method to a phylogenetic tree, ﬁrst bisect
the tree into two subtrees by completely removing an edge from the tree. Then, toreattach the tree, join the two subtrees by a new edge that leads from somewherein the one part to somewhere in the other, see Figure 3.16.
For a bifurcating phylogenetic tree TonX, let NNI( T), SPR( T)a n dT B R ( T)
denote the set of all phylogenetic trees that can be obtained by applying exactly oneNNI, SPR or TBR operation to T, respectively. It is not too difﬁcult to see that the
following inclusions hold:
NNI( T)⊆SPR( T)⊆TBR( T). (3.9)
Letndenote the number of taxa. It can be shown that the cardinality of NNI( T)
and SPR( T)d e p e n do n l yo nn . While the size of NNI( T) grows linearly with n,
the size of SPR( T)g r o w sq u a d r a t i c a l l y .T h es i z eo fT B R ( T) depends not only on
n, but also on the actual topology of the phylogenetic trees considered.
Exercise 3.8.1 (Space of trees is connected) Show that the space of all bifurcating
phylogenetic trees (without edge lengths) on n taxa is connected in the sense that anyone such tree T
1can be transformed into a second one, T 2, by a ﬁnite series of NNI
(and thus also SPR or TBR) operations.

40 Phylogenetic trees
Each of these branch-swapping methods can also be used to deﬁne a distance on
the set of all bifurcating phylogenetic trees on ntaxa. For example, the SPR distance
of two trees is the minimum number of SPR operations necessary to transform onetree into the other. We discuss such distances in Section 3.16.
3.9 Maximum likelihood estimation
LetM=(a1,..., an) be a multiple sequence alignment of length monX.T h e
basic idea of the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) method is to determine a
phylogenetic tree T, together with edge lengths ω, that maximizes the likelihood
L(T)=P(M|T,ω,M) (3.10)
of generating the given multiple sequence alignment Mon the phylogenetic tree T
with edge lengths ωunder a given model of sequence evolution M.
Such a model Mspeciﬁes how to choose the initial sequence at the root of the
tree Tand how sequences evolve along edges of the tree. For example, the Jukes-
Cantor model described in Section 3.4speciﬁes that at any position iof the root
sequence, all four nucleotides appear with the same probability of1
4.T h em u t a t i o n
rate is u. Moreover, the length ω(e)o fa n ye d g e eis interpreted as a duration and
the probability that an observable change occurs along an edge of length tis given
by the probability-of-change formula: P(change |t)=3
4/parenleftbig
1−e−4
3ut/parenrightbig
.
In practice, the models employed are more general than the simple Jukes-Cantor
model, usually allowing unequal nucleotide frequencies and different transitionprobabilities between different nucleotides. The models are generally time reversible
which implies that the optimal score attainable is independent of the location ofthe root.
A main advantage of maximum likelihood estimation is that it provides a sys-
tematic framework for explicitly incorporating assumptions and knowledge aboutthe process that generated the given data. Although evolutionary models are only arough estimate of real-world biological evolution, in practice, maximum likelihoodmethods are believed to be quite robust to violations of the assumptions made inthe models.
As with maximum parsimony, the main draw-back of this approach is that
ﬁnding an optimal phylogenetic tree is NP-hard [ 50]. In fact, the situation may be
in some sense worse: for a given phylogenetic tree T, the complexity of the problem
of deﬁning edge lengths ωonTso as to maximize the likelihood P(M|T,ω,M)
is currently unknown.
Assume we are given the multiple sequence alignment indicated in Figure 3.17 as
input. There are three possible unrooted phylogenetic trees on a set of four taxa. T osimplify the calculation of the maximum likelihood score for such a phylogenetic

41 3.9 Maximum likelihood estimation
2 1 m i
a1 C A ... G C G ... A
a2 C A ... C C G ... G
a3 C A ... C A T ... G
a4 C A ... G G T ... A
Figure 3.17 An example of a multiple sequence alignment Mof length mon four sequences.
(a) (b) (c)
(3) (2) (1) (4)
(5)
(6)C CAG
(6)(5)
(d) (e) (f)
Figure 3.18 There are three different resolved phylogenetic trees on four taxa, shown in (a), (b) and (c).
In the context of maximum likelihood estimation, any such phylogenetic tree (d) is rootedusing one of its internal nodes (e) and each individual character is considered in turn (f ).
tree Twe root it by choosing one of its internal nodes to be the root ρ,s e e
Figure 3.18. We discuss how to compute the maximum likelihood for the ﬁrst tree.
The other trees are processed similarly.
Conceptually, we obtain the likelihood L(i,T)t h a tas p e c i ﬁ cr o o t e dp h y l o g e -
netic tree Tgenerated Mi,t h e i-th character of M, by summing over all possible
labellings αof the internal nodes of Tby character states. For a bifurcating unrooted
phylogenetic tree on ntaxa, there are n−2 internal nodes, and so there are k(n−2)
possible labellings to be considered, where kis the number of possible character
states. For our example, we need to consider 16 different possibilities:
L(i,T)=PM
i/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle+PM
i/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
+ ... +PM
i/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
+ ... +PM
i/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle

42 Phylogenetic trees
In general, for a given rooted phylogenetic tree Tand model M, the likelihood of
Tfor a single character Miis given by
L(i,T)=P(Mi|T,ω,M)
=/summationdisplay
αP(Mi,α|T,ω,M)
=/summationdisplay
α/parenleftBig
P(α(ρ))/productdisplay
e={v,w}Pe(α(v),α(w))/parenrightBig
, (3.11)
where the summation is over all possible labellings αof the internal nodes, P( α(ρ))
is the probability of generating the state α(ρ)a tt h er o o ta n dP e(α(v),α(w)) is
the probability of observing the two states α(v)a n dα (w) at the two ends of an
edge e={v,w}. The likelihood that Tgenerated the whole multiple sequence
alignment Mis obtained as the product of the likelihoods for all positions of M:
L(T)=L(1,T)·L(2,T)····· L(m,T)=m/productdisplay
i=1L(i,T). (3.12)
T o obtain a value for L(i,T) we need to be able to efﬁciently calculate
P(Mi,α|T,ω,M) =P(α(ρ))/productdisplay
e={v,w}Pe(α(v),α(w)) (3.13)
for any given rooted phylogenetic Twith edge lengths ω. We discuss how to do this
for the case of the Jukes-Cantor model with mutation rate u. Under this model,
t h ep r o b a b i l i t yo fo b s e r v i n ga n yp a r t i c u l a rn u c l e o t i d ea tt h er o o tn o d ei s1
4.T h e
probability of observing two different statesα(v)a n dα (w) at opposite ends of an
edge eof length t=ω(e)i sg i v e nb y
P(α(v)/negationslash=α(w)|t)=3
4/parenleftBig
1−e−4
3ut/parenrightBig
, (3.14)
whereas the probability of observing the same s t a t ea to p p o s i t en o d e so f eequals
1−P(α(v)/negationslash=α(w)|t)=1
4/parenleftBig
1+3e−4
3ut/parenrightBig
, (3.15)
see Section 3.4.F o re x a m p l e ,t h ev a l u eo f
PM
i/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle

43 3.10 Bootstrap analysis
is given by
P(A)Pe1(A,C)Pe2(A,C)Pe3(A,A)Pe4(A,A)Pe5(A,G)
=33
46/parenleftBig
1−e−4
3ut1/parenrightBig/parenleftBig
1−e−4
3ut2/parenrightBig/parenleftBig
1+3e−4
3ut3/parenrightBig/parenleftBig
1+3e−4
3ut4/parenrightBig/parenleftBig
1−e−4
3ut5/parenrightBig
,
(3.16)
where e1,..., e5are the ﬁve edges in Tand ti=ω(ei) for i=1,..., 5.
One can efﬁciently compute the likelihood for a given bifurcating, rooted phy-
logenetic tree Twith edge lengths ωusing Felsenstein’s algorithm [73]. In this
approach, for each node vinTand every possible character state a,i nap o s t - o r d e r
traversal of T, one recursively computes the conditional likelihood Lv(a) for the
subtree Tvrooted at v, under the condition that the state of visa, that is, we have
α(v)=a.
More precisely, for any internal node vwith children w1andw2, the main
recursion is
Lv(a)=/parenleftBigg/summationdisplay
bP{v,w 1}(a,b)Lw1(b)/parenrightBigg/parenleftBigg/summationdisplay
bP{v,w 2}(a,b)Lw2(b)/parenrightBigg
, (3.17)
where summation is over all possible states band, as above, P{v,w}(a,b)i st h e
probability of observing states aand bat the two ends of the edge {v,w}under the
given model M.
T o initialize the computation, for each leaf vand every symbol a,w es e t Lv(a)=
1, if the node vis labeled by the character state a,a n d Lv(a)=0, otherwise.
The computation of L(i,T) is actually more complicated than we have described
so far, because we also have to consider all possible ways of deﬁning edge lengthsωon the tree T. The complexity of determining an optimal choice of ωfor a ﬁxed
tree is currently unknown. One possible heuristic is to optimize the length of eachedge in turn, while keeping all other edge lengths ﬁxed.
In summary, for a given multiple sequence alignment MonX, in maximum
likelihood estimation, a result is obtained by searching through all possible phy-logenetic trees Tand, for each such tree T, computing the maximum likelihood
score. The method returns the tree attaining the best score.
3.10 Bootstrap analysis
Both maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods aim at producingan optimal phylogenetic tree (or a group of optimal trees). This can be viewed as asingle point estimate of the true phylogeny (as opposed to a distribution of trees ofsimilarly high quality) and the question arises how to evaluate the robustness of the

44 Phylogenetic trees
different parts of the computed tree. A standard statistical technique for addressingthis type of question is called bootstrapping [74].
An important concept for the analysis of unrooted phylogenetic trees is that
of a split, which we discuss in more detail in Chapter 5.R e c a l lt h a ta split onX
is a bipartitioning of Xinto two non-empty sets Aand B, with A∩B=∅ and
A∪B=X.E v e r ye d g e eof an unrooted phylogenetic tree Tgives rise to a different
split ofXobtained as the two sets of taxa that label the two different parts of the tree
that are separated by e, as illustrated in Figure 5.2. We use S(T)t od e n o t et h es e t
of all splits that can be obtained from an unrooted phylogenetic tree Tin this way.
Innonparametric bootstrapping , the general approach is to sample replicate
datasets from the original input data, to apply the computational method underconsideration to each of the replicate datasets and then to count how many timesfeatures of the original result are found in the results obtained for the replicates toestimate their support.
More concretely, let Tb eap h y l o g e n e t i ct r e et h a tw eh a v ec o m p u t e df r o ma
multiple sequence alignment Mof length monX, using some phylogenetic tree
reconstruction method H.Abootstrap replicate is a multiple sequence alignment
M
/primethat consists of mcolumns that have been randomly sampled from the original
input M, with replacement. T o perform a bootstrapping analysis, a set of 1000,
say, bootstrap replicates M1,..., M1000are produced and then the method H
is applied to each replicate in turn, producing a collection of phylogenetic trees
B=(T1,..., T1000).
This set of bootstrap trees is analyzed to evaluate the statistical robustness of
the original output T.T h ebootstrap support of a split SinS(T)i sd e ﬁ n e da st h e
percentage of bootstrap trees that contain S.
Bootstrapping provides a measure for assessing how well different portions of
a phylogenetic tree are supported. A split that has a low bootstrap support issensitive to the exact combination of characters in the original input dataset andis deemed statistically unreliable. In practice, a bootstrap support of at least 70%,say, is required for a split to be considered trustworthy.
In the context of maximum likelihood estimation one can also use parametric
bootstrapping , which operates as follows. Let Mbe the assumed model of evolution.
For a given multiple alignment MonX,l e tTbe the tree obtained by the maximum
likelihood method. Generate bootstrap replicates M
1,..., M1000,s a y ,b ye v o l v i n g
sequences down the tree Taccording to the evolutionary model M.T h e nc o m p u t e
as e to fb o o t s t r a pt r e e s B=(T1,..., T1000) by applying the maximum likelihood
method to each of the bootstrap replicates, and then use these trees to determinethe bootstrap support of each split in S(T), as above.
Bootstrapping multiplies the computational requirements of tree reconstruction
by the number of replicates used, which is usually either 100 or 1000.

45 3.11 Bayesian methods
3.11 Bayesian methods
Bayesian inference of phylogenetic trees is a method whose goal is to estimate thedistribution of a quantity called the posterior probability o fap h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e[ 119].
Generally speaking, the posterior probability of a result is the conditional probability
of the result being observed, computed after seeing a given input dataset. The prior
probability of a result is the marginal probability of the result being observed,
setbefore the input dataset is examined. In other words, the prior probability
distribution of phylogenetic trees on Xreﬂects our belief of the distribution of
all possible phylogenetic trees on X. This distribution is determined in advance,
without knowledge of the actual sequence data to be examined.
LetMbe a multiple sequence alignment and Ta phylogenetic tree with edge
lengths ω,o nX. Also, we assume that some ﬁxed model of evolution Mis given.
The posterior probability of Tcan be obtained from the prior probability of Twith
the help of the likelihood P(M|T)=P(M|T,ω,M) using Bayes’ Theorem:
Theorem 3.11.1 (Bayes’ Theorem)
P(T|M)=P(M|T)×P(T)
P(M). (3.18)
The posterior probability P(T|M) can be interpreted as the probability that
the tree Tis correct, given the data. In the simplest case, all trees on Xare initially
considered to be equally probable and then the prior distribution is called a ﬂat
prior . In the case of a ﬂat prior, the posterior probability P(T|M)i sp r o p o r t i o n a l
to the likelihood P(M|T) (computed under the model M) and the maximum
likelihood tree also has maximum posterior probability.
The maximum posterior probability over all trees is usually very low, if we think
of tree space as a discrete sample space. In Bayesian tree inference the goal is not todetermine a single phylogentic tree of maximum posterior probability, but ratherto compute a sample of phylogenetic trees according to the posterior probabilitydistribution of trees. Such a sample of trees is then processed further, for example,to generate a single consensus tree (as deﬁned in Section 3.17)a n dt h e nt ol a b e l
the splits of such a tree by their posterior probabilities.
The expression for the posterior probability given by Theorem 3.11.1 looks quite
simple and we can efﬁciently compute P(M|T) using Felsensteins algorithm, as
described in Section 3.9. However, it is usually impossible to solve the complete
expression analytically, as computation of the normalizing factor P(M)u s u a l l y
involves summing over all possible phylogenetic tree topologies T
/primeand integrating
over all possible edge lengths ωand model parameters µ(of the given model M):
P(T|M)=P(M|T)P(T)
P(M)=P(M|T)P(T)/summationtext
T/primeP(M|T/prime)P(T/prime), (3.19)

46 Phylogenetic trees
where
P(M|T/prime)=/integraldisplay
ω/integraldisplay
µP(M|T/prime,ω,µ )P(ω,µ )dµdω. (3.20)
T o avoid this problem, Bayesian inference employs the Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) approach, which is based on the idea of sampling from the posterior
probability distribution using a suitably constructed chain of results. This is ageneral approach that is used in a wide range of applications.
In the context of phylogenetic tree reconstruction, the MCMC approach con-
s t r u c t sac h a i no fp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e s[ 88,104, 175]. At each step, a modiﬁcation
of the current phylogenetic tree is proposed and then a probabilistic decision ismade whether to accept the newly proposed phylogenetic tree or whether to keep
the current one.
LetT
ib et h ep h y l o g e n e t i ct r e ea tp o s i t i o n iof the MCMC chain and let T/prime
be a proposed modiﬁcation of Ti. Using what is called the Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm , the decision whether to accept T/primeor to keep Tiis based on the ratio of
the posterior probabilities of the two trees, which is given by
R=P(T/prime|M)
P(Ti|M)=P(M|T/prime)P(T/prime)P(M)
P(M|Ti)P(Ti)P(M)=P(M|T/prime)P(T/prime)
P(M|Ti)P(Ti), (3.21)
assuming that the probability of proposing T/prime,g i v e n Ti, is the same as the probability
of proposing Ti,g i v e n T/prime.
Note that the normalizing factor P(M), which is so difﬁcult to compute, can-
cels out and this expression is much easier to calculate than the actual posteriorprobability of either T
iorT/prime.B a s e do n R,w e accept the proposed phylogenetic
tree T/primewith probability min(1 ,R). In other words, we always accept T/prime,i fi th a sa
better posterior probability than Ti, and otherwise we draw a random number p
uniformly from the interval [0 ,1] and accept the tree T/primeifp<R,a n dreject T/prime,
otherwise. In the case of acceptance we set Ti+1=T/prime.
The aim is to produce an MCMC chain Zof bifurcating phylogenetic trees that
has the property that the stationary distribution of the trees (including the param-etersωandµ) in the chain approximates the posterior probability distribution of
the trees (again, including ωandµ).
For this approach to work well in practice, a number of issues must be taken into
account. First, the mechanism for modifying the current phylogenetic tree mustbe designed with care. On the one hand, the suggested changes should be quitesmall so as to avoid a drastic drop in posterior probability. On the other hand, themodiﬁcations should be large enough so as to ensure that Zis able to explore a
sufﬁcient portion of parameter space in a reasonable amount of time.

47 3.11 Bayesian methods
Second, as the MCMC chain Zstarts at a random location in parameter space,
usually of very low posterior probability, the chain must be allowed to burn in ,t h a t
i s ,i tm u s tb eg i v e nt i m et or e a c h stationarity , a state in which the chain is actually
sampling from the posterior probability. In practice, the ﬁrst 10 000 elements of Z,
say, are excluded from further analysis.
Third, trees that are close to each other in the MCMC chain Zare highly
correlated by construction, as they differ only by small modiﬁcations. T o avoid thisproblem of autocorrelation, the ﬁnal set of output trees is obtained by sparselysampling Z, retaining only every 1000-th tree, say.
What types of modiﬁcations are used in practice? Branch-swapping methods
such as NNI (nearest neighbor interchange), SPR (subtree prune and regraft)and TBR (tree bisection and reattachment) are used in the context of maximumparsimony and maximum likelihood methods to search through the space of phy-logenetic tree topologies. For the purposes of constructing an MCMC chain weneed to couple such an approach with a method for proposing modiﬁcations ofedge lengths and parameters of the evolutionary model.
3.11.1 The local algorithm
We now describe one approach that is used in practice called the local algorithm
[160 ], which is a modiﬁcation of the NNI method. The algorithm starts by choosing
an internal edge ( v,w ) of the current phylogenetic tree Tiat random. As we assume
that Tiis bifurcating, both of the nodes vandware each connected to two further
nodes, which we randomly label aand bforv,a n d cand dforw, respectively. Let
x,yand zdenote the distance from atov,wand d, respectively, as obtained by
adding the edge lengths ωof the edges from atov,vtow,a n dw tod, appropriately.
See Figure 3.19 for details.
The local algorithm changes the length of the path from atodand modiﬁes the
positions of vandwin that path. In more detail, ﬁrst deﬁne the new distance from
atodasz/prime=z×ep−0.5,w h e r e pis a random number uniformly chosen from the
interval (0 ,1). The lengths of edges on the path from atodwill be modiﬁed so
that the distance from atodwill be z/prime.
Second, randomly decide with equal odds whether node vor node wis to be
moved by a random amount. If we decide to move node v,t h e nd e ﬁ n e x/prime=q×z/prime
and y/prime=y×z/prime/z. Otherwise, deﬁne x/prime=x×z/prime/zand y/prime=q×z/prime.I nb o t hc a s e s ,
qis a random number uniformly chosen from the interval (0 ,1).
Third, to reposition the nodes vandwaccording to the values just chosen,
remove the two nodes vandwfrom the path connecting atoda n dt h e nr e i n s e r t
them into the path at distances x/primeand y/primefrom a, respectively.
Ifx/prime<y/prime, then the local algorithm does not result in a change of the current
tree topology. In this case, only the lengths of the edges from atov,vtow,

48 Phylogenetic trees
(a) (b)
Figure 3.19 A phylogenetic tree (a) before and (b) after a modification by the local algorithm. The
distance zfrom node ato node dis modified by a randomly chosen factor to a new value
ofz/prime. In this example, the node wis moved by a random amount along the path from ato
d, whereas the relative position of node von the path from atodis not changed.
andwtodchange. In more detail, we set ω(a,v)=x/prime,ω(v,w )=y/prime−x/primeand
ω(w,d)=z/prime−y/prime.
Ifx/prime>y/prime, then the modiﬁcations result is a new topology in which aandw,w
andv,a n dvand d, respectively, are connected by an edge. In this case, the edge
lengths are ω(a,w)=y/prime,ω(w,v )=x/prime−y/primeandω(v,d)=z/prime−x/prime.
Simple parameters of the evolutionary model, such as the mutation rate µin
the Jukes-Cantor model, are modiﬁed by adding a random number uniformlychosen from an appropriate interval centered at 0. For a set of parameters that isconstrained to sum to some speciﬁc value, such as 1 in the case of probabilities, thevalues are randomly modiﬁed according to a Dirichlet distribution.
A proposal for modifying the tree and a proposal for new values for all param-
eters of the speciﬁed evolutionary model are generated independently and simul-taneously, and then accepted or rejected together in a single application of theratio-based decision step of the Metropolis-Hasting algorithm.
3.11.2 Metropolis-coupled Markov chain Monte Carlo
It is important that the MCMC chain Zis given the opportunity to visit all relevant
parts of parameter space. In consequence, the larger the number of taxa is, andthe more parameters the evolutionary model Mhas, the longer the chain must
be run.
A popular approach for exploring more of parameter space in less time is to
use a variant of MCMC called Metropolis-coupled Markov chain Monte Carlo ,o r
(MC
3), for short. In this approach kdifferent MCMC chains Z1,...,Zkare run
in parallel. The ﬁrst chain Z1is called the cold chain and this is the one from which
inferences are made. The other k−1c h a i n sa r ec a l l e d heated chains that are set up
to sample from the original posterior probability distribution raised to a power of

49 3.11 Bayesian methods
βwith 0 <β< 1. Heating a chain has the effect of “ﬂattening out” the probability
landscape and the hope is that a heated chain is able to move more freely throughparameter space.
For example, in a strategy called incremental heating,t h e i-th chain Z
iaims at
sampling from the distribution P(T|M)β(i),w i t h
β(i)=1
1+λ(i−1), (3.22)
where λ> 0 is a user-speciﬁed heating parameter.
After all kchains have moved one step, a swap of states is proposed between
two randomly chosen chains ZiandZj, using a Metropolis-like algorithm. Let Ti
denote the current state of chain Zi, for all i=1,..., k. (Here, by current state we
mean the total state consisting of the current tree T, the current length parameters
ωand the current model parameters µ.) A swap between ZiandZjis accepted
with probability
α=P(Tj|M)β(i)P(Ti|M)β(j)
P(Ti|M)β(i)P(Tj|M)β(j). (3.23)
The main idea is that the heated chains act as “scouts” that explore the parameter
space. Swapping of chains can help the cold chain to move to a new part of parameterspace that it might otherwise have difﬁculty reaching, perhaps because of a deepvalley in the landscape of the original distribution. At the end of the run, theheated chains are discarded and the cold chain is then processed as describedabove.
3.11.3 Outlook
A major challenge is how to determine whether an MCMC chain Zhas been
run long enough so that the chain has converged , that is, it provides a good
approximation of the posterior distribution of trees. A simple approach is tomonitor the likelihood of the phylogenetic trees being added to Zand to assume
that convergence has occurred once there is no further increase in likelihood. Amore reliable approach may be to use multiple MCMC chains in parallel and tokeep them running until they appear to be sampling from the same distribution.
One of the main attractions of Bayesian inference is that it produces a distribution
of phylogenetic trees rather than a point estimate, in many cases using less timethan a maximum-likelihood analysis followed by a bootstrap analysis. Areas of on-going research are how to ensure convergence and also how to choose appropriateprior distributions.

50 Phylogenetic trees
3.12 Distance-based methods
The second main group of tree reconstruction methods are called distance-based
methods . In this type of approach, ﬁrst a distance matrix Dis computed and then
a phylogenetic tree Tis constructed from the distance matrix D.
Deﬁnition 3.12.1 (Distance function) Adistance function on a set Xis a function
d:X×X→R≥0that has the following three properties:
(i) Identity and separation : For any two elements x ,y∈Xwe have d (x,y)=0if
and only if x =y.
(ii) Symmetry: For any two elements x ,y∈Xwe have d (x,y)=d(y,x).
(iii) Triangle inequality: For any three elements x ,y,z∈Xwe have d (x,z)≤
d(x,y)+d(y,z).
In practice, empirically derived distances do not always satisfy the identity property,for example, when different species have exactly the same sequence for a given gene,and sometimes they do not even fulﬁll the triangle inequality. T o avoid these issues,throughout this book we use the term distance matrix to mean any function for
which at least the symmetry property holds, and usually also the triangle inequality.The term metric is only used for distance functions that have all three required
properties.
Distance-based methods are quite popular because they can be used for many
different types of data. It is often easy to deﬁne a distance measure for a novel typeof data, even when it is difﬁcult or impossible to develop an appropriate modelof evolution. An added advantage over sequence-based methods is speed. Theneighbor-joining algorithm (described below) can be applied to distance matriceson thousands of taxa in reasonable time.
When sequence data is available, trees built using distance-based methods are
often considered only a ﬁrst, fast approximation, and more elaborate sequence-based methods are then used to obtain a more trusted phylogeny.
LetMbe a multiple alignment of DNA sequences on X. The simplest approach
is to use the Hamming distance H(a,b) (also called observed p-distance ), deﬁned
as the proportion of positions at which two aligned sequences aand bdiffer. T o be
more precise, this quantity is often referred to as the normalized Hamming distance .
The unnormalized Hamming distance is deﬁned as the raw number of positions at
which two aligned sequences differ.Exercise 3.12.2 (Hamming distance fulﬁlls triangle inequality) Prove that the
Hamming distance H(·,·)fulﬁlls the triangle inequality.

51 3.12 Distance-based methods
Note that the Hamming distance between two sequences underestimates their true
evolutionary distance (average number of mutations that took place per site overthe elapsed time), as back mutations and multiple mutations at the same positionare not counted. T o rectify this, a correction formula based on some model ofevolution is often used.
For example, in the case of the Jukes-Cantor model, by inverting the probability-
of-change formula, we obtain the so-called Jukes-Cantor transformation :
JC(a,b)=−3
4ln/parenleftbigg
1−4
3H(a,b)/parenrightbigg
. (3.24)
So, if we are given a multiple alignment of sequences that we believe evolvedaccording to the Jukes-Cantor model of evolution, to compute a distance matrixthat approximates the true evolutionary distances, we ﬁrst determine the (normal-ized) Hamming distance between any two sequences aand band then apply this
transformation to get a corrected value.Exercise 3.12.3 (Jukes-Cantor transform a metric?) Check whether J C (·,·)has all
three properties of a metric.
LetTbe a phylogenetic tree on X,w i t he d g el e n g t h s ω.W ed e ﬁ n et h e tree
distance (orpatristic distance )D
T(a,b) between any two taxa a,b∈Xas the sum
of lengths ω(e) of all the edges eon the unique path from the leaf labeled ato the
leaf labeled b.L e t Dbe a distance matrix on X.T h em a i ng o a li st oc o n s t r u c ta
phylogenetic tree Tfor which the tree distances TDprovide a good approximation
of the distances in D.
LetTbe a phylogenetic tree on X,w i t he d g el e n g t h sω .T h etree length ofTis
deﬁned as the sum of lengths over all edges in T.
Given a distance matrix DonX.H o wt ot e l lw h e t h e r Distree-like , that is, whether
there exists some phylogenetic tree T(possibly with edges of length 0) such that
D=DT? Tree-like distances are also called additive , because they can be obtained
by adding the lengths of edges along paths in a suitable tree.
This global property of a distance matrix can be determined using the following
local criterion:Deﬁnition 3.12.4 (Four-point condition) A distance matrix D on Xsatisﬁes the
four-point condition i ff o re v e r yq u a d r u p l eo ft a x a w,x,y,z∈Xthe equation
d(w,x)+d(y,z)≤max{d(w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)} (3.25)
holds (that is, the two larger of the three possible sums are equal).The following result is a fundamental result in the mathematics of phylogeny [ 37]:

52 Phylogenetic trees
Theorem 3.12.5 (Additive distances and the four-point condition) Let D be a
distance matrix on X. Then D is additive, if and only if D satisﬁes the four-point
condition.In biology, the molecular clock hypothesis states that the mutation rate is constant
over all sites of the sequences and over all edges of the model tree.
Under this assumption, the leaves of the model tree all have the same dis-
tance from the root. In this case the tree is called an ultrametric tree and
any distance matrix obtained from such a tree is called an ultrametric.T ot e l l
whether a given distance matrix is an ultrametric, we can use the following localcriterion:Lemma 3.12.6 (Three-point condition for ultrametrics) A distance matrix D on
Xis an ultrametric, if and only if the following three-point condition holds: for
e v e r yt r i p l eo ft a x ax ,y,z∈Xwe either have that all three distances between
pairs of these taxa are equal, that is d (x,y)=d(x,z)=d(y,z),o rt h a tt w oo f
the distances are equal and larger than the third, that is d (x,y)=d(x,z)>d(y,z),
say.The most popular method for computing a phylogenetic tree from distances is theneighbor-joining method, which is a fast algorithm that uses a hierarchical clustering
approach. Neighbor-joining can be viewed as a modiﬁcation of an older methodcalled UPGMA. We ﬁrst describe UPGMA and then discuss neighbor-joining. We
then describe a new method, FastME, which is based on the concept of balanced
minimum evolution .
3.13 UPGMA
UPGMA stands for unweighted pair group method using arithmetic averages [220].
Given a distance matrix DonX, UPGMA produces a rooted phylogenetic tree T
with edge lengths.
The method operates by clustering the given taxa, at each stage merging two
clusters and at the same time creating a new node in the tree. The tree is assembledbottom-up, ﬁrst clustering pairs of leaves, then pairs of clustered leaves, etc. Eachnode is given a height and the length of an edge is obtained as the difference ofheights of its two end nodes.
Initially, we are given a distance matrix Dthat speciﬁes a distance d(x,y)
between any two taxa, that is, leaves, xand y, and each taxon is placed in a cluster
of its own, which is represented by a node at height 0.

53 3.13 UPGMA
abcde
a 02754
b 20754
c 77045
d 55403
e 44530
(a) Distances (b) UPGMA tree (c) Neighbor-joining tree
Figure 3.20 (a) A distance matrix D, (b) the corresponding UPGMA tree and (c) the corresponding
neighbor-joining tree.
We deﬁne the distance d(i,j)=d(Ci,Cj) between two disjoint clusters Ci⊂X
and Cj⊂Xas the average distance between pairs of taxa from each cluster:
d(i,j)=1
|Ci||Cj|/summationdisplay
x∈Ci,y∈Cjd(x,y). (3.26)
IfCkis the union of two clusters Ciand Cj,a n d Clis any other cluster, then
d(k,l)=d(i,l)|Ci|+d (j,l)|Cj|
|Ci|+| Cj|. (3.27)
This is a useful update formula that states how to compute the distance between a
new cluster and an existing one in constant time. The cluster Ckis represented by
an o d ea th e i g h td(i,j)
2that is connected to the two nodes representing the union of
the two clusters Ciand Cj.
The UPGMA algorithm repeatedly merges two closest clusters until only one
cluster remains, computing a phylogenetic tree TinO(n3) steps, with n=|X|.A n
example is shown in Figure 3.20b.
Exercise 3.13.1 (UPGMA) Verify that the UPGMA method applied to the distance
matrix in Figure 3.20a produces the tree shown in Figure 3.20b.
By construction, any tree produced by the UPGMA algorithm has the propertythat all leaves have the same distance to the root. Moreover, we have the followingresult:Lemma 3.13.2 (UPGMA on ultra metrics) Let D be a distance matrix on X.
UPGMA computes a tree T with D
T=D, if and only if D fulﬁlls the three-point
condition, that is, D is an ultrametric.The distance matrix Ddisplayed in Figure 3.20 does not fulﬁll the three-point
condition. For example, the distances between c,dand eare 3, 4 and 5, and so all
three are not the same, nor are two equal and larger than the third. The lemma

54 Phylogenetic trees
implies that the distances DTobtained from the UPGMA tree Tdo not equal D.
For example, in DTthe leaf chas the same distance to both dand e,w h i c hi sn o t
t h ec a s ei n D.
3.14 Neighbor-joining
Given a distance matrix DonX,t h eneighbor-joining method produces an unrooted
phylogenetic tree T,w i t he d g el e n g t h s ω[208, 229]. It is more widely applicable
than UPGMA, as it does not assume a molecular clock.
The neighbor-joining algorithm is a modiﬁcation of the UPGMA algorithm.
Both algorithms are agglomerative methods that repeatedly decide which twoclusters to join so that their nodes are “neighbors” in the resulting phylogenetictree. In UPGMA, this decision is based on the current distances and two clusters ofsmallest distance are chosen. This works correctly, when the distances come froman ultrametric tree, because then closest nodes are indeed also neighbors. In a moregeneral setting, two clusters or nodes may be separated by only a short distancewithout being true neighbors, see Figure 3.20, and in this case, UPGMA produces
an incorrect tree.
T o avoid this problem, the neighbor-joining algorithm subtracts the average
distance (almost) of each cluster to all other clusters to compensate for the effectof large distances. A pair of clusters C
i,Cjthat minimizes the following neighbor-
joining matrix is chosen to form the next pair of neighbors:
N(Ci,Cj)=d(Ci,Cj)−(ri+rj), (3.28)
where
ri=1
|C|−2/summationdisplay
C∈Cd(Ci,C), (3.29)
andCdenotes the set of current clusters. Note that riis not precisely the average,
as the number of non-zero summands is |C|−1, not |C|−2.
There are two further differences between neighbor-joining and UPGMA,
namely how the distance matrix is updated after merging two clusters and how thelengths of edges are set.
LetC
iand Cjbe two clusters that are about to be merged into a new cluster Ck.
IfCm∈Cis some other cluster /negationslash=Ci,Cj, then the equations
d(Ci,Cm)=d(Ci,Ck)+d(Ck,Cm),
d(Cj,Cm)=d(Cj,Ck)+d(Ck,Cm) (3.30)
and
d(Ci,Cj)=d(Ci,Ck)+d(Cj,Ck),

55 3.14 Neighbor-joining
(a) (b)
Figure 3.21 The dashed lines in (a) represent the distances between the three clusters Ci,Cjand Cm
before pairing the nodes iand j. The dashed line in (b) represents the distance between
the new cluster Ck=Ci∪Cjand Cmafter pairing the nodes iand j. The neighbor-joining
algorithm sets this distance to d(Ck,Cm)=1
2(d(Ci,Cm)+d(Cj,Cm)−d(Ci,Cj)).
Figure 3.22 The neighbor-joining algorithm sets the length of the edge from itokequal to1
2of the
average distance qifrom Cito all current clusters Cmwith m/negationslash=i,jplus the distance from
CitoCj, minus the average distance qjfrom Cjto all such clusters Cm.
imply
d(Ci,Cm)+d(Cj,Cm)=d(Ci,Ck)+d(Ck,Cm)+d(Cj,Ck)+d(Ck,Cm)
=d(Ci,Cj)+2d(Ck,Cm), (3.31)
and so the distance from Ckto the cluster Cmis given by:
d(Ck,Cm)=1
2/parenleftbig
d(Ci,Cm)+d(Cj,Cm)−d(Ci,Cj)/parenrightbig
, (3.32)
see Figure 3.21.
In the ﬁnal step, when the two remaining clusters are connected, the length
of the new edge is set to the distance between the two remaining clusters. In allother cases the neighbor-joining algorithm sets the length of the edge linking thetwo nodes iand krepresenting clusters C
iand Cktod(Ci,Ck)=1
2(d(Ci,Cj)+
ri−rj). T o see why, note that ri=1
|C|−2/summationtext
C∈Cd(Ci,C) equals the average dis-
tance qi=1
|C|−2/summationtext
Cm∈C,Cm/negationslash=Ci,Cjd(Ci,Cm)f r o m Cito all other clusters Cm/negationslash=
Ci,Cj,p l u sd(Ci,Cj)
|C|−2.H e n c e ,2 d(Ci,Ck)=d(Ci,Cj)+qi−qj=d(Ci,Cj)+
qi−qj+d(Ci,Cj)
|X|−2−d(Ci,Cj)
|X|−2=d(Ci,Cj)+ri−rj, which implies d(Ci,Ck)=
1
2(d(Ci,Cj)+ri−rj), see Figure 3.22.

56 Phylogenetic trees
Exercise 3.14.1 (Neighbor-joining) Verify that the neighbor-joining tree for the
distance matrix in Figure 3.20ai st h eo n ed e p i c t e di nF i g u r e 3.20c.
LetDbe a distance matrix on X, under what conditions does neighbor-joining
construct a tree Tthat correctly represents all distances in D, that is, for which
DT=Dholds?
Theorem 3.14.2 (Neighbor-joining on additive distances) Let D be a distance
matrix on X. Neighbor-joining constructs a (unique) unrooted phylogenetic tree T
with D T=D if and only if D is additive.
The proof of this theorem can be found in the original paper [ 208].
Please convince yourself that the distance matrix Ddisplayed in Figure 3.20 ful-
ﬁlls the four-point condition. In this case, the lemma implies that the distances DT
represented in the neighbor-joining tree Tcomputed from Dequal the distances
inD. So, in this example, the neighbor-joining tree shown in 3.20c gives an exact
representation of the distance matrix D, while the UPGMA tree shown in 3.20b is
incorrect.
Distance matrices considered in practice rarely fulﬁll the three-point or four-
point condition. In such cases neighbor-joining, and, to a lesser extent, alsoUPGMA, is nevertheless applied and the hope is that the deviations from therequired conditions will have only a small inﬂuence on which phylogenetic tree iscomputed by the algorithm.
One question that remained unclear for many years is whether the neighbor-
joining algorithm solves, or is an heuristic for, some explicit optimization problem.In other words, does the algorithm aim to optimize some quantity, analogous, say,to the parsimony score that is minimized by the maximum parsimony method?Quite recently, it was shown that neighbor-joining does, in fact, greedily opti-mize a quantity called the BME tree length , which we discuss in the following
section.
3.15 Balanced minimum evolution
A new distance-based method called FastME has recently been developed within
the framework of balanced minimum evolution (BME )[57,58]. As we shall see,
both neighbor-joining and FastME are heuristics for ﬁnding an optimal BME
tree. The new approach appears to have three advantages over neighbor-joining.
The algorithm is substantially faster, provides more accurate trees and neverproduces negative edge lengths (which happens quite frequently with neighbor-joining).

57 3.15 Balanced minimum evolution
(a) Leaf edge (b) Internal edge
Figure 3.23 In an unrooted, bifurcating phylogenetic tree, every edge eis either (a) a leaf edge, separating
two subtrees containing taxon sets Aand Bfrom some taxon x, or (b) an internal edge,
separating two subtrees labeled by taxon sets A,Bfrom two other labeled by Cand D.
LetDbe a distance matrix on Xand assume that we have some unrooted,
bifurcating phylogenetic tree TonX. Within the BME setting, every edge eis
assigned a balanced edge length ω(e)t h a ti sc o m p u t e df r o mt h e balanced average
distances between the taxa that span the edge.
In more detail, to deﬁne the balanced edge length of an edge einTthere are
two cases to consider: either eis a leaf edge or eis an internal edge, as shown in
Figure 3.23. In the former case, we deﬁne the length of eas:
ω(e)=1
2/parenleftbig
dT(A,{x})+dT(B,{x})−dT(A,B)/parenrightbig
, (3.33)
whereas, in the latter case, we set:
ω(e)=1
4/parenleftbig
dT(A,C)+dT(B,D)+dT(A,D)+dT(B,C)/parenrightbig
−1
2/parenleftbig
dT(A,B)+dT(C,D)/parenrightbig
. (3.34)
Here, A,..., Ddenote the subsets of taxa induced by the edge e.M o r e o v e r ,w e
usedT(A,B)t od e n o t et h e balanced average distance from taxon set Ato taxon set
BinX, which is recursively deﬁned as follows. We set
dT(A,B)=d(a,b), (3.35)
when Aand Bcontain only one taxon each, that is, if A={a}and B={b}.
Otherwise, we set
dT(A,B)=1
2/parenleftbig
dT(A,B1)+dT(A,B2)/parenrightbig
, (3.36)
ifBis made up of two sets B1and B2that label two different subtrees. We treat the
case that Ais made up of two such sets A1and A2analogously.
This averaged distance is called balanced because two subsets such as B1and B2
enter the calculation with equal weight, regardless of how many taxa they contain,in contrast, say, to the deﬁnition of distances between clusters used in the UPGMAmethod, see Section 3.13. Note that the length of an edge does not only depend
on the distances between taxa that span the edge, but also on the topology of thetree T.

58 Phylogenetic trees
a1 a2 bcd 1d2
a1 02 3 4 79
a2 20 3 5 47
b 33 0 3 86
c 45 3 0 34
d1 74 8 3 03
d2 97 6 4 30
(a) Distances D (b) Tree T
Figure 3.24 In (a) we show a distance matrix DonX={a1,a2,b,c,d1,d2}and in (b) we show an
unrooted phylogenetic tree TonX. The four sets of taxa A,..., Dused to compute the
balanced edge length for eare indicated by circles. In the text we discuss how to compute
the balanced edge length for edge eand in Exercise 3.15.1 the task is to do the same for
edge f.
Consider the distance matrix Dand phylogenetic tree Tshown in Figure 3.24.
How is the balanced edge length for the edge ecomputed? T o answer this, we must
ﬁrst calculate all balanced average distances between the indicated taxon sets A,B,
Cand D, as follows:
dT(A,C)=d(a1,c)+d (a2,c)
2=4+5
2=4.5
dT(B,D)=d(b,d1)+d (b,d2)
2=8+6
2=7
dT(A,D)=dT({a1},D)+dT({a2},D)
2
=d(a1,d1)+d (a1,d2)+d (a2,d1)+d (a2,d2)
4=6.75
dT(B,C)=d(b,c)=3
dT(A,B)=d(a1,b)+d (a2,b)
2=3+3
2=3
dT(C,D)=d(c,d1)+d (c,d2)
2=3+4
2=3.5(3.37)
Using Equation (3.34) we obtain:
ω(e)=1
4(4.5+7+6.75+3)−1
2(3+3.5)=2.0625. (3.38)
Exercise 3.15.1 (Compute balanced edge length) Compute the balanced edge length
for the edge f shown in Figure 3.24.
The following result provides a nice formula for computing the length of a treewith balanced edge lengths [ 196]:
Lemma 3.15.2 (Tree length formula) Let D be a distance matrix on Xand let T
be an unrooted, bifurcating phylogenetic tree, together with balanced edge lengths ω
computed from D. The tree length of T is given by
l(T)=/summationdisplay
x,y∈X21−pT(x,y)d(x,y), (3.39)

59 3.15 Balanced minimum evolution
where pT(x,y)is the number of edges on the path from the leaf labeled x to the leaf
labeled y in T.
Note that this formula can be generalized to the case of multifurcating trees, as
follows [ 216]:
l(T)=/summationdisplay
x,y∈X/productdisplay
v∈◦pT(x,y)(dv−1)−1d(x,y), (3.40)
where◦pT(x,y) denotes the set of all internal nodes on the path from the leaf
labeled xto the leaf labeled yand dvis the degree of v. We can now formulate an
optimization goal that provides the basis for a tree-reconstruction method:Deﬁnition 3.15.3 (Balanced minimum evolution tree) For a given distance matrix
Do nX, determine a phylogenetic tree T on X, with balanced edge lengths ωfrom
D ,f o rw h i c ht h et r e el e n g t hl (T)is minimum over all such trees. We call such a tree
Tabalanced minimum evolution tree (or BME tree) for D.
Computing the BME tree is a statistically consistent tree reconstruction method[58]. Unfortunately, the problem of ﬁnding an optimal balanced minimum evolu-
tion tree is believed to be NP-hard. So we need to turn to heuristics.
Interestingly, the neighbor-joining algorithm is in fact a greedy heuristic for
computing the BME tree [84]. Recall that in each iteration, the neighbor-joining algorithm considers all possible pairs of taxa and chooses a pair forwhich the entry in the neighbor-joining matrix is minimum. A careful analy-sis using the generalization of the tree length formula to multifurcating treesshows that, in each iteration, the pair chosen by the algorithm also maximizes thedecrease in the length of the tree computed using balanced edge lengths. Thus wehave:Lemma 3.15.4 ( N e i g h b o r - j o i n i n gi sg r e e d yB M E ) The neighbor-joining method
selects as neighbors at each step the pair of current taxa that most decreases the treelength, as computed using balanced edge lengths.We now turn to the FastME heuristic. The algorithm has two phases. In the ﬁrstphase, an initial phylogenetic tree is built in a stepwise fashion. In the second phase,the tree is iteratively improved using NNI operations until no further improvementcan be attained:Algorithm 3.15.5 (FastME) For a given distance matrix D on X={x
1,
x2,..., xn},t h e FastME algorithm approximates a BME tree for D in two phases.
In the ﬁrst phase, the taxa are added to the tree sequentially. Assume we have already
inserted the ﬁrst k taxa {x1,..., xk}and the resulting tree is T k. We consider each of

60 Phylogenetic trees
the2(k−3)edges of T kas possible insertion positions for a new edge joining a new
leaf labeled x k+1to T kand choose the position that gives rise to the smallest new tree
length, thus obtaining T k+1.
The second phase seeks to improve the tree length of T nby repeatedly performing
an NNI swap that provides the best improvement of the tree-length, until no furtherimprovement can be achieved.For this algorithm to run fast, a crucial observation is that the algorithm does notneed to explicitly compute the edge lengths or tree lengths of the trees considered.All that is required is that the change in tree length associated with the insertionof a taxon or with an NNI swap is determined. If all balanced averages havealready been computed (which requires O(n
2) steps), then evaluating the tree
length change associated with any insertion or NNI move can be done in constanttime. This explains why FastME runs signiﬁcantly faster than the neighbor-joiningalgorithm in practice.
The balanced minimum evolution approach can be viewed as an improvement
over the classical minimum evolution approaches. Let Dbe a distance matrix on
X.I nt h e ordinary least squares approach, for a given unrooted phylogenetic tree
T,e d g el e n g t h s ωare computed that provide a least squares ﬁt to the distance
matrix D. The method then returns such a tree of shortest length. A weakness of
this method is that it explicitly assumes that all distances have the same variance,which is usually not true, as the variances of larger distances tend to be larger. T oaddress this problem, in the weighted least squares approach , estimates for variances
are taken into account [ 76,81].
In the BME approach, the variances of all pairwise distances are not assumed to be
constant, but rather they are taken to depend on the (topological) distance betweentaxa. The tree length formula Equation (3.39) implies that large (topological)distances have low weight. BME can be interpreted as a weighted least squaresapproach and the FastME algorithm runs substantially faster than all previousweighted least square approaches.
3.16 Comparing trees
Given two phylogenetic trees T1andT2onX, how can their similarity be measured?
In the case of unrooted phylogenetic trees, there are two popular measures, namelytheRobinson-Foulds distance [204 ]a n dt h e quartet distance [70 ].
The Robinson-Foulds distance was originally deﬁned as the number of edge
contractions and “decontractions” required to transform one tree into the other.Since each edge corresponds to a split, and we can regard a contraction as removal

61 3.16 Comparing trees
(a) Tree T (b) Subtree T(C) (c) Restriction T|C
Figure 3.25 For the rooted phylogenetic tree TonX={a,..., g}displayed in (a), we show (b) the
minimal rooted subtree T(C)onC={b,d,f,g}(with nodes of in- and outdegree one
shown as black disks) and (c) the restriction T|CofTtoC={b,d,f,g}.
of a split and a “decontraction” as addition of a new split, the Robinson-Fouldsdistance can be deﬁned as follows:Deﬁnition 3.16.1 (Robinson-Foulds distance) The Robinson-Foulds distance
between two unrooted phylogenetic trees T
1and T 2onXis based on the symmetric
difference of the sets of splits represented by the two trees:
dRF(T1,T2)=1
2|S(T1)/triangleS (T2)|. (3.41)
Exercise 3.16.2 (Robinson-Foulds distances) Compute the Robinson-Foulds dis-
tance between each pair of trees shown in Figure 3.26a–d.
Before introducing the quartet distance, we need to discuss how to restrict aphylogenetic tree onto a subset of its taxa:Deﬁnition 3.16.3 (Restriction of a phylogenetic tree) Let T be a phylogenetic tree
onXand let C ⊂Xbe a subset of taxa. We use T (C)to denote the minimum
connected subgraph of T that contains all leaves that are labeled by elements of C.The restriction of T to C is deﬁned as the phylogenetic tree T |
Cthat is obtained from
T(C)be suppressing all suppressible nodes.
An example is shown in Figure 3.25.I f Tis a rooted phylogenetic tree on X,t h e n
both T(C)a n d T|Cwill be rooted, as well. The restricted phylogenetic tree T|C
is sometimes also called the induced phylogenetic tree ,o rt h et r e ei n d u c e db y C,
although it is not the induced graph as deﬁned in Chapter 1.
LetTbe an unrooted phylogenetic tree on X. For any set of four distinct taxa
{a,b,c,d}inX,t h et r e e T|{a,b,c,d}induced by the four leaves of Tthat are labeled
bya,b,cand dis called a quartet tree . We use Q(T)t od e n o t et h es e to fa l l
such quartet trees obtainable from T. The quartet distance between two unrooted
phylogenetic trees is deﬁned as follows:

62 Phylogenetic trees
Deﬁnition 3.16.4 (Quartet distance) The quartet distance between two unrooted
phylogenetic trees T 1and T 2onXis deﬁned as
dquartet (T1,T2)=1
2|Q(T1)/triangleQ (T2)|. (3.42)
Both of these distances can be computed efﬁciently. The Robinson-Foulds metricis often used in simulation studies to compare the topology of an inferred tree withthe topology of the underlying model tree. However, a draw-back of the Robinson-Foulds distance is that the placement of individual taxa has a large inﬂuence onthe distance; one rogue taxon is enough to produce a large distance between twootherwise very similar trees.
Another approach to comparing two trees is to determine the minimum number
of branch-swapping operations required to transform one tree into the other.This gives rise to the so-called NNI ,SPR and TBR distances .A l lt h r e eo ft h e s e
distances are NP-hard to compute and are thus rarely used in practice. However,the computation of these distances is currently an active area of research and thisw o r km a yl e a dt ob e t t e rt o o l sf o rt h e i ra p p l i c a t i o n .
For a rooted phylogenetic tree TonX,l e tC(T) denote the set of all clusters
represented by T. In analogy to the Robinson-Foulds distance we deﬁne:
Deﬁnition 3.16.5 (Cluster distance) The cluster distance between two rooted phy-
logenetic trees T
1and T 2onXis deﬁned as
dcluster (T1,T2)=1
2|C(T1)/triangleC (T2)|. (3.43)
LetTb ear o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e eo n X. For any set of three distinct taxa {a,b,c}
inX,l e t T|{a,b,c}denote the rooted tree induced by the three leaves of Tthat are
labeled by a,band c. We use R(T)t od e n o t et h es e to fa l ls u c hrooted triple trees
obtainable from T. The rooted triple distance between two rooted phylogenetic
trees is deﬁned as follows:Deﬁnition 3.16.6 (Rooted triple distance) The rooted triple distance between two
rooted phylogenetic trees T
1and T 2onXis deﬁned as
dtriple(T1,T2)=1
2|R(T1)/triangleR (T2)|. (3.44)
T o compare rooted phylogenetic trees, a rooted version of the SPR branch-swappingmethod, called rSPR, can be used. The rSPR distance between two rooted phylo-
genetic trees T
1and T2onXis given by the minimum number of rooted SPR
operations required to transform one tree into the other. An algorithm for com-puting the NP-hard rSPR distance is presented in Section 11.5.2.

63 3.17 Consensus trees
Phylogenetic trees are often compared as unrooted trees, even when they are
rooted, because the placement of the root in the trees is usually uncertain and canhave a large effect on the rooted distance measures.
3.17 Consensus trees
In most practical phylogenetic studies, a whole collection of different phylogenetictrees is computed for the set of taxa under investigation. These might be differ-ent phylogenetic gene trees that were obtained from a number of different gene
s e q u e n c e si nam u l t i - g e n es t u d y .O r ,t h e ym i g h tb ed i f f e r e n tp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e sobtained from the same multiple sequence alignment using different inferencemethods, such as maximum-parsimony, maximum-likelihood and so forth. Y etanother possibility is that the collection of phylogenetic trees was obtained using amethod that produces multiple trees, such as Bayesian inference.
In all such cases, one may want to treat the different phylogenetic trees as
different estimations of the same underlying true evolutionary tree and then aconsensus method can be used to construct a consensus tree that represents those
parts of the evolutionary history on which the different phylogenetic trees agree,in some sense.
Although consensus methods can be formulated for rooted phylogenetic trees,
such methods are less commonly used, probably because most tree inference meth-ods produce unrooted trees, and also perhaps because the location of the roots inthe input trees may affect the resulting consensus tree too much. We ﬁrst discuss thetwo most important consensus methods for unrooted phylogenetic trees, namelythestrict consensus and the majority consensus. We then describe the Adams consen-
sus, which operates on rooted phylogenetic trees. Although the latter is rarely used
in practice, it is of interest to us because it has a very natural interpretation in thecontext of rooted phylogenetic networks, as we will see in Section 6.6.
LetXbe a set of taxa and assume that we are given a collection of phylogenetic
treesT=(T
1,..., Tk)o nX.L e tS strict(T) denote the set of all splits that occur in
every input tree, that is, we deﬁne
Sstrict(T)=/intersectiondisplay
T∈TS(T). (3.45)
We call this the set of strict consensus splits of the collection of phylogenetic trees T.
The strict consensus tree is the (unique) phylogenetic tree Tstrictfor which S(Tstrict)=
Sstrict(T) holds. It can be obtained from any tree in Tby contracting every edge
whose split is not contained in Sstrict(T).

64 Phylogenetic trees
(a)Tree T 1 (b) Tree Tree Tree T2 (c) T3 (d) T4
(e) Strict consensus Tstrict (f) Majority consensus Tmajority
Figure 3.26 For the collection of four phylogenetic trees T=(T1,..., T4)shown in (a–d) we display the
strict consensus tree Tstrict in (e) and the majority consensus tree Tmajority in (f).
In practice, the strict consensus tree may be quite unresolved, often being very
close to the star tree , which consists of one central node incident to all leaf edges.
The majority consensus is usually more informative.
LetSmajority (T)d e n o t et h es e to f majority consensus splits ,t h a ti s ,t h es e to fa l l
splits that occur in more than half of all trees in T, formally deﬁned as
Smajority (T)=/braceleftbigg
S:|{T∈T:S∈S(T)}|>k
2/bracerightbigg
. (3.46)
By the pigeon-hole principle, any two splits S1and S2that are contained in
Smajority (T) must also occur in some input tree together, and thus must be com-
patible as deﬁned in Section 5.3. Thus, by Theorem 5.3.2, there exists a unique
phylogenetic tree Tmajority (T) corresponding to Smajority , which is called the major-
ity consensus tree .
In Figure 3.26 we show four unrooted phylogenetic trees on X={a,b,c,d,
e,f}and the corresponding strict and majority consensus trees.
We now discuss the Adams consensus. An important concept for the analysis of
rooted phylogenetic trees is that of a cluster onX, which is deﬁned as any subset
ofX, excluding both the empty set ∅and the full set X. This concept was brieﬂy
introduced in Section 1.6and is discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
Any edge e=(u,v) in a rooted phylogenetic tree Tdeﬁnes a cluster CeonX
that consists of all taxa assigned to descendants of v. We say that a cluster Ci s
represented byT,i fC=Cefor some edge econtained in T.W ed e ﬁ n et h elowest
common ancestor of a set of taxa A⊂Xto be the lowest node uinTsuch that all
leaves labeled by taxa in Aare descendants of u.( R e c a l lt h a tan o d e wislower than
an o d ev ,i fwis a descendant of v).

65 3.17 Consensus trees
(a) Tree Tree T1 (b) T2
(c) Adams consensus tree TAdams (d) LSA consensus tree TLSA
Figure 3.27 For the two phylogenetic trees T1and T2shown in (a) and (b), we display the Adams
consensus tree TAdams in (c) and the LSA consensus tree TLSAin (d).
For any two sets of taxa Aand BonXwe say that Ai sn e s t e di nB (inT), if
the lowest common ancestor of Ais a proper descendant of the lowest common
ancestor of B.( N o t et h a t ais called a proper descendant of bif it is a descendant
and a/negationslash=b.) We say that a cluster Aismaximal in a tree T,i ft h et r e e Tdoes not
represent any other cluster Bthat properly contains A.
For a collection of rooted phylogenetic trees T=(T1,... Tk)t h eAdams consen-
sus tree T Adams is deﬁned as the unique rooted phylogenetic tree that satisﬁes the
following two conditions [ 1,2]:
/squaresolidIfAand Bare any two sets on Xsuch that Ais nested in Bfor every tree T∈T,
then Ais nested in BinTAdams .
/squaresolidIfAand Bare any two clusters on Xthat are represented by TAdams ,s u c ht h a t A
is nested in BinTAdams ,t h e n Ais nested in Bin every tree T∈T.
Although this deﬁnition is a little unintuitive, the Adams consensus tree is easy tocompute. The ﬁrst step is to determine, for each input tree T
i(i=1,..., k), the
setMiof all clusters represented by Tithat are maximal in Ti. The second step it
to consider all possible choices of one cluster Ci∈Miper input tree such that the
intersection C=C1∩···∩ Ckis non empty. Each such non-empty set Cdeﬁnes
a cluster of TAdams . We then recursively apply the algorithm to the set of all input
trees restricted to C.
In Figure 3.27 we show the Adams consensus TAdams of two trees T1and T2.
This is compared with the LSA consensus tree T LSA, which is obtained using a new
consensus method that we have developed in the context of rooted phylogenetic

66 Phylogenetic trees
(a) Tree Tree T1 (b) T2
Figure 3.28 Two rooted phylogenetic trees T1and T2used in Exercise 3.17.1.
(1 )
(2 ),( 3 )z
a,b,c ( 4),( 5)
d,e f,g
((a,b,c),((d,e),(f,g))z);
(a) Rooted tree T (b) Newick description
Figure 3.29 For the rooted phylogenetic tree TonX={a,..., g}in (a) we show how to construct the
corresponding Newick string in (b). In this example, one internal node is labeled, namelynode v
3has label z. From top to bottom, the outer pair of brackets (labeled 1) correspond
to the internal node v1, the next two pairs of brackets (labeled 2and 3) correspond to v2
andv3, and the last two pairs (labeled 4and 5) correspond to v4andv5. The labels a,..., g
correspond to the leaves labeled by the taxa a,..., g. The final Newick description is written
in the bottom line.
networks. We discuss the LSA consensus method in Section 6.6.1 and state that the
two trees obtained by these two different methods are always very similar in thesense that they are compatible with each other.
Exercise 3.17.1 (Adams consensus for two trees) Compute the Adams-consensus
for the two trees T
1and T 2s h o w ni nF i g u r e 3.28.
3.18 The Newick format
The Newick format for trees is used to describe the topology and edge lengths of
a rooted phylogenetic tree in a single line of text. Let Tbe a rooted phylogenetic
tree on X. In this format, each internal node of Tis represented by a pair of round
brackets “ () ”a n de v e r yl e a fo f Tis represented by its taxon label. T o assign a
label to an internal node, write the label directly after the closing bracket associatedwith the node. If a node vis an ancestor of some node winT, then the brackets or
label representing wwill be contained between the pair of brackets that represent

67 3.18 The Newick format
v. The brackets or labels representing the children w1,...,wkof an internal node
vare listed inside the brackets representing vand are separated by commas. T o
indicate the length ω(e)o ft h ee d g ee leading to a node v, we write a colon and the
value of ω(e)a f t e rt h eb r a c k e t so rl a b e lr e p r e s e n t i n g v.T h ee n do fat r e ed e s c r i p t i o n
is indicated by a semi-colon.
Although the Newick format is inherently rooted, it can also be used for describ-
ing unrooted phylogenetic trees. T o write an unrooted phylogenetic tree in Newickformat, simply root the tree arbitrarily and then proceed as in the rooted case.When constructing an unrooted phylogenetic tree from a Newick string, ﬁrst con-struct the rooted phylogenetic tree and then erase the root. Also, note that there isno need for the leaf labels used to be unique and so the Newick format can be usedto describe multi-labeled trees, as well (as deﬁned in Section 11.7).
Exercise 3.18.1 (Reading and writing Newick) Design an algorithm for writing a
rooted phylogenetic tree in Newick format. Design an algorithm that parses a Newickstring and constructs the corresponding rooted phylogenetic tree.
Chapter notes
Most of the content of this chapter is based on teaching notes from our courseonAlgorithms in Bioinformatics taught at T ¨ubingen University in recent years.
Those notes, in turn, are based on the cited papers, on Chapter 11 of “MolecularSystematics” [ 230], and, in addition, on the following books: “Phylogenetics” by
Semple and Steel [ 217], “Inferring Phylogenies” by Felsenstein [77] and “Biological
Sequence Analysis” by Durbin and colleagues [ 64].

4
Introduction to phylogenetic networks
In the previous chapter we give a brief introduction to phylogenetic trees. Phy-logenetic networks provide an alternative to phylogenetic trees and may be moresuitable for datasets whose evolution involve signiﬁcant amounts of reticulateevents caused by hybridization, horizontal gene transfer, recombination, geneconversion or gene duplication and loss [ 56,61,89,201, 219, 231]. Moreover,
even for a set of taxa that have evolved according to a tree-based model ofevolution, phylogenetic networks can be usefully employed to explicitly repre-sent conﬂicts in a dataset that may, for example, be due to mechanisms such asincomplete lineage sorting or to inadequacies of an assumed evolutionary model[125].
While rooted phylogenetic networks can, in theory, be used to explicitly describe
evolution in the presence of reticulate events, their calculation is difﬁcult andcomputational methods for doing so have not yet matured into practical andwidely used tools [ 24,98,106, 127, 225,237]. In contrast, there are a number of
established tools for computing unrooted phylogenetic networks, which can be usedto visualize incompatible evolutionary scenarios in phylogeny and phylogeography[9,10,11,32,52,122,125].
In practice, most currently available algorithms for computing phylogenetic net-
works are based on combinatorics and this book focuses on such approaches. Someapproaches developed within a maximum-parsimony or maximum-likelihoodframework can be found, for example, in [ 59,106,141,142,143,228].
In this chapter, we give an introduction to the topic of phylogenetic networks,
very brieﬂy describing the fundamental concepts and summarizing some of themost important methods that are available for the computation of phylogeneticnetworks. In essence, this chapter provides an overview of the material that ispresented in Parts II and III of the book.
68

69 4.2 What is a phylogenetic network?
Figure 4.1 Overview of the main concepts mentioned in this chapter. First, we distinguish between
unrooted (on the left) and rooted networks (on the right). While all phylogenetic networksmentioned on the left generalize unrooted phylogenetic trees, all mentioned on the rightgeneralize rooted trees. Second, we distinguish between explicit networks (shown belowthe node labeled “Explicit” on the right) and abstract ones (all others).
4.1 Overview
Figure 4.1shows the relationships between some of the concepts mentioned in
this chapter. The aim is to give a brief introduction to some of the main typesof phylogenetic networks. As with phylogenetic trees, a ﬁrst major distinction isbetween unrooted and rooted phylogenetic networks. A second major distinction is
between explicit and abstract phylogenetic networks, as we explain below.
4.2 What is a phylogenetic network?
In the literature, the term phylogenetic network is deﬁned and used in a number
of different ways, usually focusing on the speciﬁc type of network that an authorhappens to be interested in [ 7,98,165]. For example, a phylogenetic network is
sometimes too narrowly deﬁned as a rooted DAG whose leaves are labeled by taxa.In this book, we propose the following more general deﬁnition:Deﬁnition 4.2.1 (Phylogenetic network) Aphylogenetic network is any graph used
to represent evolutionary relationships (either abstractly or explicitly) between a set oftaxa that labels some of its nodes (usually the leaves).

70 Introduction to phylogenetic networks
Figure 4.2 The concept of a rooted phylogenetic “network of life”, as proposed in [ 61]. Reprinted by
permission of AAAS: Science, 284(5423):2124-2128 c/circlecopyrt1999.
The envisioned role of rooted phylogenetic networks in biology is to describe theevolution of life in a way that explicitly includes reticulate events. Ultimately, themain goal is to work out the details of a rooted phylogenetic network of life ,s u c h
as the one proposed by Ford Doolittle [61], see Figure 4.2.
There are a number of different types of unrooted phylogenetic networks. In
this book, we mainly focus on the important class of split networks, discussing
the theory of split networks in Chapter 5and describing a number of different
algorithms for computing them in Part III of the book. A second important class ofunrooted phylogenetic networks are quasi-median networks,w h i c hc a nb ev i e w e d
as a generalization of split networks, and are discussed in Chapter 7. Algorithms
for computing these and some other types of unrooted phylogenetic networks arepresented in Part III of the book.
Rooted phylogenetic networks generalize rooted phylogenetic trees and such a
network is usually deﬁned as a rooted DAG whose leaves are labeled by taxa. Wepresent the theory of clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks in Chapter 6and
describe a number of different algorithms for computing them in Part III of thebook.
Phylogenetic networks can be used in two different ways: The ﬁrst type of usage
is as a tool for visualizing incompatible datasets in a fruitful manner, in whichcase we speak of an abstract phylogenetic network. The second type of usage is as
a representation of a putative evolutionary history involving reticulate events, inwhich case the network is called explicit .
By deﬁnition, most (if not all) types of unrooted phylogenetic networks are
abstract networks, as evolution in inherently rooted (and thus any unrooted

71 4.3 Unrooted phylogenetic networks
phylogenetic treeis also abstract in this sense). However, rooted phylogenetic net-
works can be either abstract or explicit, depending on how they are constructedand interpreted.
The necessity of distinguishing between abstract and explicit networks was
pointed out in [ 180]. They are called implicit and explicit in [123]. In [181],
abstract and explicit networks are named data-display networks and evolutionary
networks, respectively.
Phylogenetic networks can be computed from a wide range of data, including
multiple sequence alignments, distance matrices, sets of trees, clusters, splits, rootedtriplets or unrooted quartets.
In the literature, perhaps as many as 20 different names have been deﬁned for
different types of phylogenetic networks. A closer look reveals that some networksare named by the algorithms that compute them or by mathematical propertiesthat deﬁne them, such as “neighbor-nets” or “median networks” . Others are namedby topological constraints that are imposed on them for computational reasons,such as “galled trees” , “galled networks” or “level- knetworks” . Y et others are named
by the types of evolutionary events which they model, such as “hybridizationnetworks” , “recombination networks” or “duplication-loss-transfer networks” .
4.3 Unrooted phylogenetic networks
LetXbe a set of taxa. An unrooted phylogenetic network N onXis any unrooted
graph whose leaves are bijectively labeled by the taxa in X.T h i si sav e r yg e n e r a l
deﬁnition and there are a number of special types of unrooted phylogenetic net-works that are used in practice, the most important of which we consider in detailin this book.
4.3.1 Split networks
The foundation for split networks was laid in [ 9]. LetXbe a set of taxa and assume
that we are given a set of splits SonX, usually together with a weighting that
assigns a non-negative weight to each split, which may represent character changesdistance, or may also have a more abstract interpretation. If the set of splits S
is compatible, then it can be represented by an unrooted phylogenetic tree andeach edge in the tree corresponds to exactly one of the splits. More generally, S
can always be represented by a split network, which is an unrooted phylogenetic
network with the property that every split SinSis represented by an array of
parallel edges in N(see Section 5.5). An example is shown in Figure 4.3.
A split network Ncan be obtained from a number of different types of data. T o
be more precise, the algorithms mentioned below do not compute a split networkdirectly, but rather they all compute a set of weighted splits S. A split network N

72 Introduction to phylogenetic networks
Ceriodaphnia
Simocephalus
Leptodora
LepidurusTriopsLynceus
Diaphanosoma
Bythotrepes Limnadia
StreptocephalusEurypelma
ScolopendraLimulusMeloe
AeschnaAnaspidesNebaliaDaphnia
Branchinecta
Thamnocephalus
A
NOSTRACACyclestheriaArtemia
Lithobius MYRIAPODACHELICERATABRANCHIOPODAINSECTAMALACOSTRACAANOMOPODA
LeptestheriaEulimnadiaNOTOSTRACA
Figure 4.3 A split network on 25species of Branchiopoda and outgroups, computed from 18S rDNA
sequences using the neighbor-net algorithm, as reported in [ 239 ]. The authors compare
this network to a maximum parsimony tree for the same dataset and discuss how thenetwork exhibits conflicting signals that are not represented in the tree. Reprinted fromBMC Evolutionary Biology 7:147 (2007) under the Creative Commons Attribution License.
is then computed using the convex hull algorithm orcircular network algorithm ,
as described in Chapter 7. All splits-based algorithms discussed in this book are
implemented in the program SplitsTree [ 125]( s e eS e c t i o n 14.1).
Split networks from distances
There exist a number of methods for computing a set of weighted splits for a givendistance matrix DonX. The two most important are the split decomposition method
[9]a n dt h eneighbor-net method [32], which are both described in Chapter 10.
The split decomposition method takes as input a distance matrix DonXand
produces as output a set of weighted splits SonXthat is weakly compatible ,a
property that ensures that the corresponding split network will not be too com-plicated (see Section 5.8). In practice, the split decomposition method is a very
conservative method, in the sense that a split will only be present in the outputif there is global support for it in the given dataset. For large or diverse datasets,the method tends to exhibit very low resolution and thus its use is limited to smalldatasets of less than 100 taxa, say.
The neighbor-net method takes as input a distance matrix DonXand produces
as output a set of weighted splits SonXthat is circular, which implies that it can
be represented by an outer-planar split network (see Section 5.7), if used together

73 4.3 Unrooted phylogenetic networks
with the circular network algorithm (see Section 7.21). The neighbor-net methodis more popular than the split decomposition method because it is less conservativeand so does not lose resolution on larger datasets. Moreover, the fact that the outputof the method can always be represented by a planar split network and is thus easyto visualize adds to its attraction, see Figure 4.3.
Both network methods have the nice property that they produce a tree when
given tree-like data.
Split networks from trees
LetT=(T1,..., Tk) be a collection of unrooted phylogenetic trees on X.T h e s e
might be different gene trees, or trees for the same gene computed using differ-ent methods, or a set of trees obtained in a Bayesian analysis, for example. InSection 3.17, we discussed how to compute a strict consensus tree or majority con-
sensus tree using the set of S
strict(T)o rSmajority (T) of strict- or majority-consensus
splits, respectively.
The set of majority-consensus splits is deﬁned as the set of all splits that are
present in more than 50 % of the input trees. By lowering the threshold to aproportion pof 50 % or less, one obtains a set of splits S
p(T)t h a tw i l ln o t
necessarily be compatible. The split network Nassociated with Sp(T)i sc a l l e da
consensus split network and can be used to visualize conﬂicting signals in a set of
trees [ 113], see Section 11.1.
In practice, in a collection of gene trees, the set of taxa that occurs in each tree
will often differ between trees, simply because some gene sequences may not be notavailable for all taxa. T o address this, methods have been developed to compute asuper split network for a given set of unrooted phylogenetic trees Ton overlapping,
but non-identical taxon sets [126, 243], see Section 11.2. An application is shown
in Figure 11.3.
Split networks from sequences
Assume that we are given a multiple sequence alignment MonX.A n yc o l u m ni n
the alignment that contains exactly two different character-states deﬁnes a split ofthe taxon set, and the set of splits S(M) obtainable in this way can be represented
by a split network N, computed using the convex hull algorithm.
If we label each edge of the network Nby the columns in the alignment M
that correspond to the split represented by the edge, then the resulting split net-work is called a median network [11]. This construction is suitable for datasets
that have very few differences in them. Hence, median networks are mainly usedin phylogeography and population studies. Because parallel mutations can lead tocomplicated structures in such a network, the concept of a reduced median net-
work was also introduced [ 11], in which one attempts to simplify the network by

74 Introduction to phylogenetic networks
Wild boar in the Mekong regionNortheast Asia wild boar
Domestic pig in region UMYROther Northeast Asia domestic pig
Domestic pig in the Mekong regionDomestic pig in South China
D1d
D1c1
D1bD1a2D1e
D1c2D1g
D1i
D1c3D1h
D1a1aWild boar in South China
D1a3D1a1a-1D1a1a-2Domestic pig in region URYZWild boar in region URYZFeral pigs
Japanese domestic pig and ancient DNA
*Coalescent root type of haplogroup D1
*Domestic pig in region DRYR
D1fDomestic pig in region MDYZ
Wild boar in region MDYZ
100
60
20
10
51 One mutation
Figure 4.4 A reduced median network reported for a set of over 700 pigs, wild boar and other closely
related animals sampled across China, South East Asia and India, based on mtDNA [ 245 ].
This network was constructed to investigate the question whether pigs were independentlydomesticated in multiple places. Reprinted from Genome Biology 8:R245 (2007) under theCreative Commons Attribution License.
postulating appropriate parallel mutation events. An example of a reduced mediannetwork is shown in Figure 4.4.
Split networks from quartets
Mathematicians are interested in developing methods that infer a phylogenetic treeor network from basic building blocks. In the computation of an unrooted tree orsplit network, these are phylogenetic trees on sets of four taxa, sometimes calledquartet trees . One such method is the quartet-net method ,o rQNet, for short [ 91]. It
takes as input a set Qof weighted quartet topologies on Xa n dp r o d u c e sa so u t p u t
a set of weighted splits SonXthat is circular, and thus can be represented by an
outer-planar split network. This method is described in Section 12.3.
4.3.2 Quasi-median networks
As we mentioned in the previous section, a median network can be used to visualizea set of binary characters on a set of taxa X.T h ec o n c e p to fa quasi-median network

75 4.3 Unrooted phylogenetic networks
was introduced as a type of network that can be used to represent multi-statecharacters.
A quasi-median network is a generalization of the concept of a split network
and is discussed in detail in Section 9.5. In general the quasi-median network for
a multiple sequence alignment Mof DNA sequences on Xis too large and too
complicated to be of practical interest. At the other extreme, a minimum spanning
network can be used to represent the differences between the sequences in M.T h i s
type of network is often of limited interest, too, because it contains one node pertaxon and no additional nodes (see Figure 10.1 for an application).
The median-joining algorithm [10] constructs an informative subnetwork of
the full quasi-median network, guided by the minimum spanning network, thusovercoming the drawbacks of both approaches (see Section 9.6). The median-
joining method is best suited for very closely related sequences that have evolvedwithout recombinations and is widely used in phylogeography and populationstudies, usually based on mtDNA or the Y chromosome. An application is shownin Figure 9.12.
Implementations of the median network and median-joining algorithms are
provided by the programs Network and SplitsTree (see Chapter 14).
4.3.3 Other types
There are a number of other types of unrooted phylogenetic networks. We brieﬂydescribe two of them.
Haplotype networks
Ahaplotype network is an unrooted phylogenetic network in which nodes represent
different haplotypes within a group of (usually very closely related) taxa and edgesjoin those sequences or haplotypes that are very similar. The edges are usuallylabeled by the positions at which the joined haplotypes differ.
Both the median network computation and the median-joining algorithm can
be used to compute a haplotype network. Another popular approach is the TCSapproach [ 233]( s e eS e c t i o n 14.3) .I ti sb a s e do nt h ec o n c e p to fstatistical parsimony
and aims at producing a haplotype network in which two haplotypes are joined byan edge if and only if a quantity called the “probability of parsimony” exceeds 95%for the edge.
Reticulograms
A reticulogram is an unrooted phylogenetic tree to which a set of auxiliary edgeshas been added. A reticulogram is obtained from a distance matrix DonXusing
the T-Rex software, which ﬁrst computes a phylogenetic tree on X(using a method
such as neighbor-joining) and then repeatedly adds short-cut edges to the graph

76 Introduction to phylogenetic networks
until the distances between taxa in the graph shows a good ﬁt to the distances inthe original input matrix D[171], see Section 10.5.
4.4 Rooted phylogenetic networks
LetXbe a set of taxa. A rooted phylogenetic network N onXis a rooted DAG whose
set of leaves is bijectively labeled by the taxa in X. Any node of indegree ≥2i s
called a reticulate node and all others are called tree nodes. Any edge leading to a
reticulate node is call a reticulate edge and all others are called tree edges. This is
a very general deﬁnition and additional requirements can be made, for example,that the network is bicombining , in other words, that all reticulate nodes have
indegree 2.
How to interpret such a rooted phylogenetic network mathematically? Perhaps
the most important feature of a rooted phylogenetic tree or network is the setof clusters that the network represents, as clusters suggest putative monophyleticgroups and thus provide hypotheses about the evolutionary relatedness of thetaxa under consideration. Hence, in this book, we treat the calculation of rootedphylogenetic networks in a “cluster-centric” manner and usually interpret rootedphylogenetic networks as representations of sets of clusters.
E x a c t l yh o wd o e sar o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r k NonXrepresent a cluster?
There are two different answers to this question. We say that a network Nrepresents
a given cluster ConXin the hardwired sense, if there exists a tree edge einN
such that the set of labels of leaves below eequals C.A l t e r n a t i v e l y ,w es a yt h a t
Nrepresents Cin the softwired sense, if there exists a rooted phylogenetic tree T
that is contained in Nand represents C(in the hardwired sense). This is a very
important distinction and we discuss it in detail in Section 6.8.
4.4.1 Clusters and networks
Assume that we are given a set of clusters ConX.Acluster network N forCis a
rooted phylogenetic network that represents the set of clusters on Xin the hard-
wired sense [121]. It can be computed efﬁciently using the cluster-popping algo-
rithm (see Section 6.4). The number of edges that it contains is at most quadratic
in the number of given clusters. A cluster network is an abstract phylogeneticnetwork that can be used, for example, to provide a combined visualization ofa whole set of rooted phylogenetic trees. In Section 6.7we show that a cluster
network Nthat represents all clusters of a given set of trees also contains all the
trees themselves, if they are bifurcating, and otherwise it contains resolutions ofthem.
A number of new methods aim at constructing a rooted phylogenetic network N
that represents a set of clusters in the softwired sense, motivated by the assumption

77 4.4 Rooted phylogenetic networks
that the set of clusters that a network represents is its most important feature, asargued above. In Chapter 8, we discuss some of these new approaches, which aim at
computing galled trees, galled networks [131]a n d level- knetworks [136]. The latter
algorithm shows particular promise of becoming a general tool for computingrooted phylogenetic networks from different types of data.
All cluster-based methods described in this book are implemented in the pro-
gram Dendroscope [ 120].
4.4.2 Hybridization networks
Assume that we are given a set of taxa Xthat have evolved under a model of
evolution that includes both speciation events and descent-with-modiﬁcation, asusual, and, in addition, hybridization events. Then the evolutionary history of thetaxa in Xcan be represented by a rooted phylogenetic network NonXwhose
tree nodes correspond to speciation events and whose reticulate nodes correspondto putative hybridization events [ 165]. (Descent-with-modiﬁcation events, such as
mutations, insertions or deletions always occur along the edges of a phylogenetic
tree or network). A rooted phylogenetic network that is interpreted in this way iscalled a hybridization network ,s e eF i g u r e 4.5.
We may attempt to determine such a hybridization network computationally
w h e ng i v e nt w oo rm o r eg e n et r e e so n Xwhose topologies differ signiﬁcantly and
we suspect that these differences are due to hybridization events. The correspondingcomputational problem can be formulated as follows. Given a set Tof two or more
rooted phylogenetic trees on X, determine a rooted phylogenetic network Nthat
contains all trees in Tand has a minimum number of reticulate nodes. This is
known to be a computationally hard problem [ 27,241].
In Section 11.5 we discuss an algorithm that addresses the problem of computing
a hybridization network Nfor an input set consisting of exactly two bifurcating
trees T
1and T2[24]. In practice, the algorithm appears to run reasonably fast in
many cases. No comparable algorithm exists, at present, for solving the problemon more than two input trees.
4.4.3 Recombination networks
Assume that we are given a set of taxa Xthat have evolved under a model of
evolution that includes both speciation events and descent-with-modiﬁcation, asusual, and, in addition, recombination events. Then, the evolutionary history ofthe taxa in Xcan be represented by a rooted phylogenetic network NonXwhose
tree nodes correspond to speciation events and whose reticulate nodes correspondto recombination events. In addition, we require that the following two labellingsare given [ 89,98,128, 224]:

78 Introduction to phylogenetic networks
Figure 4.5 A rooted phylogenetic network on fish reported in [153 ]. In this hybridization network,
black lines and triangles indicate a rooted phylogenetic tree inferred on AFLP data from thenuclear genome. Vertical arrows indicate suspected cases of hybridization and dashed linesindicate putative missing lineages, inferred by a comparison to phylogenetic trees basedon mitochondrial genes. Reprinted from BMC Evolutionary Biology 7:7 (2009) under theCreative Commons Attribution License.
(i) a labeling of all nodes by sequences, and
(ii) a labeling of all tree edges by positions in the sequences at which mutations
occur.
These labellings must be compatible in the sense that the sequences assigned totree nodes of the network differ exactly by the indicated mutations, while thesequences assigned to reticulate nodes must be obtainable from the sequencesassigned to the parents nodes by suitable recombinations, see Deﬁnition 9.8.1.A

79 4.4 Rooted phylogenetic networks
rooted phylogenetic network that is augmented and interpreted in this way is calledarecombination network .
In this book, we describe two different approaches to the problem of computing
a recombination network. An early method [ 106] is based on the idea of assigning
a rooted phylogenetic tree to each position of a given multiple sequence alignment
MonXin the most parsimonious way, see Section 9.8.1.
More recently, Gusﬁeld and colleagues have established a different approach [ 98].
T o obtain a problem that is computationally tractable, they restrict their attentionto recombination networks that have the galled tree property. The approach is
described in detail in Section 9.9. An application is shown in Figure 9.22.
Under the “coalescent-with-recombination” model of population genetics, a
description of the history of nsampled sequences going backward in time gives
rise to a graph that is called an ancestral recombination graph (ARG)[ 90,108]. This
graph is used to perform statistical analysis of the inheritance and prevalence ofgenes in populations and its exact topology is usually of little interest. Ancestralrecombination graphs are beyond the scope of this book.
4.4.4 DLT networks
Assume that we are given a set of taxa Xthat have evolved under a model of
evolution that includes both speciation events and descent-with-modiﬁcation,as usual, and, in addition, gene duplication, loss and horizontal-transfer events[56,197]. An example is shown in Figure 4.6.
The associated computational problem can be formulated as follows: Given a
gene tree Tand a corresponding species tree T
sp, reconcile all differences between
the two trees by postulating an appropriate duplication–loss–transfer (DLT) sce-
nario. Such a scenario provides a mapping of the gene tree onto the species tree thatimplies certain duplication, loss and transfer events. In Section 11.8 we present an
approach that addresses this problem and seeks to minimize the number of impliedduplication and transfer events [ 100].
4.4.5 Other types
There are a number of other types of rooted phylogenetic networks. We now brieﬂydiscuss three of them.
Reassortment networks
Many viruses are organized into segments of sequence and evolve both by descent-with-modiﬁcation and also by reassortment ,ap r o c e s sb yw h i c hv i r u s e st h a th a v ec o -
infected a host exchange segments of their genomes. Reassortment is an importantmechanism. For example, a possible route to infection of humans by avian strainsof inﬂuenza A is that swine get co-infected by avian and human viruses and

80 Introduction to phylogenetic networks
Aa Rs Bp Smγ-proteobacteria
Pasteurellaceae Rhizobiaceaeα-proteobacteriaGram-positive
bacteria
Mt Cd Sc Pg Ct At Ml Cc Af Bc Nm PaVc Se Ec Yp
H1
R1H5
H475(56/15/4)*
268(200/59/9)*
51(51/N/N)*tadV
tadGtadEtadDtadCtadBtadAtadZrcpArcpC
72(48/15/9)H3
R3D6
R4H2
D2
D4
D7D5D3R2D1YePm Hi
Figure 4.6 A rooted phylogenetic network reported in [ 197 ]. The aim is to provide a plausible evolu-
tionary scenario for the tad (tight adherence) locus for colonization of surfaces and biofilmformation by the human pathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans. Here, tubes rep-
resent the species taxonomy. Embedded trees represent phylogenies of different genes.Two-letter abbreviations are used to indicate the names of different bacterial species. Sin-gle letters indicate different types of events, namely H, horizontal gene transfer events; R,recombination and gene replacement; D, duplications. Losses are not indicated for simplic-ity. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Genetics 34:193-198
c/circlecopyrt2003.
these reassort to produce a new virus carrying both avian- and human-adaptedgenes [ 47].
Areassortment network is a directed graph in which nodes represent viral isolates
and edges represent the evolutionary history of the viruses, including reassortmentevents. Edge weights reﬂect the edit costs of reassortment and mutation events.Such a graph is organized in layers that correspond to evolutionary stages such asthe seasons in which the viruses were isolated [ 21].
Networks from multi-labeled trees
Gene duplication is a common event in evolution and so many genes are present inmultiple copies in a genome. When some taxa are represented by multiple copiesof a gene in a phylogenetic tree, then the tree is called multi-labeled .T oa n a l y z e
the duplication history of a gene, it may be helpful to map such a multi-labeledphylogenetic tree onto a rooted phylogenetic network so as to see which parts of thetree are similar and where are there differences [ 117]. Algorithms for constructing

81 4.5 The extended Newick format
such a network are discussed in Section 11.7 and an application is presented in
Figure 11.16.
Networks from rooted triples
As already mentioned above, mathematicians are interested in developing meth-ods that infer a phylogenetic tree or network from basic building blocks. In thecomputation of a rooted tree or network, these are rooted phylogenetic trees onthree taxa, which are sometimes called rooted triples. In this context, the input is
as e t Rof rooted triples on Xand the goal is to compute a rooted phylogenetic
network Nthat contains all the rooted triples in Rand is optimal in some sense.
One possible optimality criterion is to minimize the level of the network N,w h i c h
is deﬁned as the maximum number of reticulation nodes contained in any bicon-nected component of the network. We give an introduction to this type of approachin Section 12.1.
4.4.6 Combining view versus transfer view
A rooted phylogenetic network NonXcan be drawn and interpreted in two differ-
ent ways. In a combining view ofN, all edges entering a particular reticulate node are
rendered and interpreted as reticulate edges. Such a view is appropriate for rootedphylogenetic networks in which the reticulate nodes represent recombinations orhybridizations, say.
In a transfer view , for each reticulate node in Nexactly one in-edge is drawn as a
tree edge and all other in-edges are interpreted as transfer edges .T h i st y p eo fv i e w
is used, for example, when a rooted phylogenetic network Nis to be interpreted
as a species tree that has been augmented by some additional edges that representputative horizontal gene transfer events, as in Figure 4.6. The two types of views
are compared in Figure 13.12.
Exercise 4.4.1 (Combining view) The hybridization network in Figure 4.5is shown
in a transfer view. Draw it in a combining view.
4.5 The extended Newick format
As described in Section 3.18, the Newick format is widely used for describing the
topology and edge lengths of a rooted phylogenetic tree in a single line of text. TheNewick format can be extended so as to describe a rooted phylogenetic network
NonX. Here we describe the extension that is implemented in the program
Dendroscope [120], see also [ 43]. The main idea is to modify the network Nso
that it becomes a rooted phylogenetic tree, by cutting all but one in-edge of each

82 Introduction to phylogenetic networks
(a) Rooted network N (b) Rooted tree T
Figure 4.7 (a) A rooted phylogenetic network NonX={a,..., f}. (b) A multi-labeled phylogenetic
tree TonX/prime={a,..., f,#H1,#H2,#H3}that can be used to determine the Newick descrip-
tion of N. (c) The resulting Newick string.
reticulate node, and then labeling the new leaf nodes by additional formal taxa soas to indicate which nodes belong together.
In more detail, assume that the network Nhaskreticulate nodes r
1,..., rk.
Assign a formal label # Hito each reticulate node ri, for all i, and set X/prime=X∪
{#H1,..., #Hk}. For each reticulate node richoose one incoming edge eto keep.
For all other edges fleading to ri,r e p l a c e fby a new edge to a new leaf labeled
#Hi.T h er e s u l t i n gm o d i ﬁ c a t i o no f Ni sar o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e eo n X/primethat is
possibly multi-labeled and possibly has internal node labels. It can be written inNewick format as described in Section 3.18.
T o construct the rooted phylogenetic network Nencoded by a given Newick
string, ﬁrst create the represented rooted phylogenetic tree TonX
/primeas described in
Section 3.18. Then convert the tree into a rooted phylogenetic network by merging
any two nodes that are labeled by the same formal taxon #Hi,w h e r e iis a number.
In Figure 4.7we show a rooted phylogenetic network NonX, the corresponding
multi-labeled tree TonX/primeand the resulting Newick string.
How to specify that a rooted phylogenetic network Nshould be shown in a
transfer view? Assume that Nhaskreticulate nodes r1,..., rk. For each reticulate
node riinN, exactly one of the occurrences of the formal label # Himust be replaced
by ##Hito indicate which in-edge of rii st ob ed r a w na sat r e ee d g e .
Exercise 4.5.1 (Newick for combining and transfer views) Write down the Newick
string for the hybridization network shown in Figure 4.5, ﬁrst for the combining view
and then for the transfer view. Enter the two strings into the Dendroscope program(see Section 14.4) and compare the resulting visualizations.

83 4.6 Which types of networks are currently used in practice?
4.6 Which types of networks are currently used in practice?
For which of the types of phylogenetic networks mentioned above do there existestablished and robust methods and software for their computation in evolutionarystudies?
For unrooted phylogenetic networks, most of the methods mentioned are rou-
tinely used in phylogenetic analysis or phylogeography, in particular, neighbor-net, consensus split (super) networks and median-joining, given distances, trees orsequences, respectively.
This is not the case for rooted phylogenetic networks. While a number of algo-
rithms have been described for computing rooted phylogenetic networks, thereare some problems to overcome. First, for many of the algorithms there exist onlyproof-of-concept implementations that are not designed to be used as tools in realstudies. Second, the computational problems are often hard and the algorithms haveimpractical running times. Third, the calculation of rooted phylogenetic networksmust be more closely linked to detailed biological models of reticulate evolution soas to produce more plausible results.
At present, none of the existing methods for computing a rooted phylogenetic
method is widely or routinely used as a tool to help understand the evolutionaryhistory of a given set of taxa in terms of mutations, speciations and speciﬁc typesof reticulate events. While rooted phylogenetic networks are conceptually veryappealing, the development of suitable methods for their computation remains aformidable challenge.



Part II
Theory
In this second part of the book we develop the theoretical foundations for phy-logenetic networks. First we study splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks(Chapter 5). The mathematical and computational aspects of such networks have
been worked out in detail over the last 20 years. The existing algorithms are routinelyused in numerous publications in systematic biology. Then we turn to clusters androoted phylogenetic networks (Chapter 6). Their theory is still under development
and widely used methods for the computation of rooted phylogenetic networkshave yet to emerge.



5
Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
The concept of a split plays an important role in the mathematics of phylogeny.
It is motivated by the simple, but crucial, observation that every edge ein an
unrooted phylogenetic tree Tdeﬁnes a bipartition of the underlying taxon set X
into two non-empty and disjoint subsets, Aand B,k n o w na sa split. The splits of
an unrooted phylogenetic tree uniquely deﬁne the topology of the tree and splitsare used, for example, to compare different trees or to compute consensus trees.Any set of splits that is compatible corresponds to a phylogenetic tree and so one
possible way to generalize from trees to networks is to consider sets of splits thatareincompatible .
Splits provide the basis of unrooted phylogenetic trees and a large class of
unrooted phylogenetic networks, namely split networks, just as clusters provide the
basic building blocks for rooted phylogenetic trees and networks (see Chapter 6).
The foundation for the theory of split networks was laid down in a seminal paperby Bandelt and Dress [ 9].
5.1 Overview
Figure 5.1shows the relationships between some of the main concepts introduced
in this chapter. The focus is on splits ,a n do n split networks as an important type of
unrooted phylogenetic networks . We compare splits to clusters, since the two concepts
are closely related to each other. We describe the Buneman graph construction that
provides a canonical split network for an arbitrary set of splits. We shall see thatsplits can be compatible ,circular orweakly compatible . A nice feature of circular
splits is that they can be represented by split networks that are outer-labeled planar .
Weakly compatible splits are of interest because they can be efﬁciently calculatedusing the split decomposition algorithm. We also give a brief introduction to T-
theory , a related mathematical theory.
Tree inference approaches (described in Chapter 3)c a nb et h o u g h to fa sm e t h o d s
for computing compatible sets of splits. The split decomposition method provides
87

88 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
Figure 5.1 Overview of the main concepts introduced in this chapter. On the left, we list the different
properties that a set of splits can have, in order of decreasing generality, and in the middle,we list the corresponding types of split networks.
one way of computing a set of incompatible splits on X. Other methods for
computing a set of splits that is not necessarily compatible are presented in Part IIIof the book.
5.2 Splits
Splits and clusters are closely related concepts. While clusters group taxa to empha-
size their common features, splits divide taxa to emphasize their distinctive features.
Here is the formal deﬁnition of a split:Deﬁnition 5.2.1 (Split) Asplit S=A|B is a bipartition of a set of taxa Xinto two
non-empty subsets A ,Bw i t hA ∩B=∅ and A ∪B=X. We also use the notation
A
BandB
Aequivalently, to improve readability. A weighted split is a split S that has
been assigned a weight ω(S)≥0.
Note that there is no ordering in a split and so A|Bequals B|A. Consider a
split S=A|BonX.W ec a l l Aand Bthe two split parts ofS.T h e sizeof a split
S=A|Bis deﬁned as the minimal cardinality of the two parts Aand B.M o r e
formally, size( S)=min{|A|,|B|}. A split of size one is called a trivial split .F o ra n y
taxon x∈X, we use S(x) to denote the split part that contains xand we use ¯S(x)
to denote the other part.
LetSbe a set of splits on Xand let X/prime⊂Xbe a subset of taxa. We deﬁne the
set of splits induced byX/prime,o rt h e restriction ofSto the subset X/prime,a s
S|X/prime=/braceleftbiggA∩X/prime
B∩X/prime:A
B∈S,A∩X/prime/negationslash=∅ and B∩X/prime/negationslash=∅/bracerightbigg
. (5.1)

89 5.2 Splits
{a}|{b,c,d,e}
{b}|{a,c,d,e}
{c}|{a,b,d,e}
{d}|{a,b,c,e}
{e}|{a,b,c,d}
{a,b}|{c,d,e}
{a,b,e}|{c,d}
(a) Unrootedtree TT (b) Split encoding of
Figure 5.2 (a) An unrooted phylogenetic tree TonX={a,...,e }. (b) The seven splits represented
byT.
As already mentioned, any edge eof a phylogenetic tree Tdeﬁnes a split of the
underlying taxon set Xas follows: Deletion of eproduces precisely two subtrees,
T/primeand T/prime/prime,s a y ;t h es p l i td e ﬁ n e db y eis then the split A|B,w h e r e Aand Bare the
taxon labels occurring in T/primeand T/prime/primerespectively. We use σT(e)=A|Bto denote
thesplit represented by e .B e c a u s ee v e r yl e a fi nap h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e Tis labeled by
some taxon, it follows that both Aand Bare non-empty. Further, as each taxon
occurs precisely once in T, it follows that A∩B=∅ and A∪B=X.I ft h ee d g e s
of the tree have lengths or weights, then these can be assigned to the correspondingsplits, as well.
IfTdoes not contain any unlabeled nodes of degree two, then any two different
edges eand falways represent two different splits, that is, σ
T(e)/negationslash=σT(f) must
hold. The only situation in which a phylogenetic tree can contain an unlabeledn o d eo fd e g r e e2i sw h e ni th a sar o o tw i t ho u t d e g r e et w o .I nt h i sc a s e ,t h et w oedges eand fthat originate at the root ρgive rise to the same split σ
T(e)=σT(f),
but to two complementary clusters.
A common construction to avoid this special case at the root ρis to attach an
additional leaf to ρthat is labeled by a special taxon o, which we call a (formal)
outgroup . Then the root of a phylogenetic tree is speciﬁed as the node to which
the leaf edge of oattaches. All phylogenetic trees that are discussed in this chapter
are unrooted. However, by using this outgroup trick much of what we discuss
concerning unrooted trees can also be adapted to rooted phylogenetic trees.
LetTbe an unrooted phylogenetic tree on X.W ed e ﬁ n et h e split encoding S(T)
to be the set of all splits represented by T,t h a ti s ,
S(T)={σ(e)|eis an edge in T}. (5.2)
The term encoding is justiﬁed by the observation that the tree Tcan be uniquely
reconstructed from S(T), as we see in the next section.
Figure 5.2shows an unrooted phylogenetic tree that has seven edges and thus
gives rise to seven different splits. We can determine all splits associated with anyg i v e nu n r o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e Tin quadratic time using the following algorithm:

90 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
Algorithm 5.2.2 (Splits from tree) The set S(T)of all splits associated with an
unrooted phylogenetic tree T on Xcan be computed as follows:
(i)Choose a start leaf ρand assume that all edges of T are directed away from ρ.
(ii)I nap o s t o r d e rt r a v e r s a lo fT,f o re a c hn o d ev compute the set L (v)of taxon labels
that are encountered in the subtree rooted at v.
(iii) For each edge e =(u,v)of T, add the split σ(e)=L(v)
X−L(v)toS(T).
Exercise 5.2.3 (Splits on a tree) Consider the following set of splits
S=/braceleftBig
{a}
{b,c,d,e},{b}
{a,c,d,e},{c}
{a,b,d,e},{d}
{a,b,c,e},{e}
{a,b,c,d},{a,b}
{c,d,e},{a,e}
{b,c,d}/bracerightBig
. (5.3)
Does there exist an unrooted phylogenetic tree T on X={a,...,e }whose split
encoding equals S?
5.3 Compatibility and incompatibility
S u p p o s ew ea r eg i v e na na r b i t r a r ys e to fs p l i t s SonX. We would like to know
whether Scan be represented by some unrooted phylogenetic tree T,t h a ti s ,d o e s
there exist some tree TwithS=S(T)? The answer is given by the concept of
compatibility [37 ].
Deﬁnition 5.3.1 (Compatibility of splits) Two splits S 1=A1|B1and S 2=A2|
B2onXare called compatible, if one of the following four possible intersections of
their split parts is empty:
A1∩A2,A1∩B2,B1∩A2or B 1∩B2. (5.4)
Otherwise, the two splits are called incompatible. A set of splits Sis called compatible
if all pairs of splits in Sare compatible.
The following result states that the local condition that every pair of splits in S
is compatible sufﬁces to ensure that we have the global property that all splits in S
can be realized simultaneously on a single unrooted phylogenetic tree:Theorem 5.3.2 (Compatibility Theorem) LetSbe a set of splits on Xand assume
thatScontains all trivial splits on X. There exists a unique unrooted phylogenetic
tree T that realizes S, that is, with S(T)=S,i fa n do n l yi fS is compatible.
This result was ﬁrst formulated and proved in [ 37] .O n ew a yt os e et h a tt h e
result holds is simply to apply the outgroup trick and then the result follows fromthe analogous result for clusters and rooted phylogenetic trees, which is shown inSection 6.4.

91 5.4 Splits and clusters
{a,b,c}|{d,e,f},
{a,b,e,f}|{c,d},
{a,b,f}|{c,d,e},
{a,c}|{b,d,e,f}{a,b,c}
{d,e,f}—{a,b,f}
{c,d,e}
{a,b,e,f}
{c,d}—{a,c}
{b,d,e,f}
(a) Set of splits (b) Incompatibility graph
Figure 5.3 (a) A set of four splits SonX={a,..., f}. (b) The corresponding incompatibility graph
IG(S), which has four nodes and four edges.
In the above theorem we require that the set of splits Scontains all trivial splits
onX. This assumption can be dropped if we use X-trees rather than phylogenetic
t r e e si nt h et h e o r e m .
It is often useful to represent the incompatibilities among a set of splits Sby a
g r a p ht h a ti sd e ﬁ n e da sf o l l o w s[ 9] (see Figure 5.3):
Deﬁnition 5.3.3 (Incompatibility graph) The incompatibility graph IG(S)of a
set of splits Sis the graph (V,E)that has node set V =Sand edge set E =/braceleftbig
{S1,S2}|
S1and S 2are incompatible/bracerightbig
.
A split S∈Sis compatible with all other splits in S, if and only if it is an isolated
node in the incompatibility graph. In consequence, a set of splits Sis compatible
if and only if the incompatibility graph IG(S) has no edges.
5.4 Splits and clusters
Splits are the unrooted counterparts of clusters and the two concepts are closelyrelated. As discussed in Section 3.16 and Chapter 6, clusters can be represented by
rooted phylogenetic trees or networks. In this section, we discuss how to transformsplits to clusters and vice versa.
T o obtain a set of clusters Cfrom a set of splits SonX, we must ﬁrst choose
anoutgroup taxon o∈X. Then, for each split S=
A
BinS, we deﬁne the cluster
Cassociated with Sto be the split part that does not contain o, that is, we set
C=¯S(o). We usually also consider {o}as a cluster, to ensure that all trivial clusters
are present in C.
Exercise 5.4.1 (Splits to clusters) Prove that this assignment preserves incompatibil-
ities, in other words, that Sis compatible if and only if Cis compatible (see Deﬁnition
6.2.2).Exercise 5.4.2 (Splits to clusters example) Using c as an outgroup, list all clusters
for the set of splits shown in Figure 5.3(a).

92 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
LetSbe a set of splits on X.I fS is compatible, then there exists an unrooted
phylogenetic tree Tthat represents S. In this case, an alternative method to deﬁne
the associated set of clusters Cis to choose a root ρforTand then to let Cbe the
set of all clusters represented by the rooted version of T.I fw ec h o o s ean o d eo f T
to be the root, then there is a simple one-to-one correspondence between the splitsand clusters. On the other hand, if the root is chosen so as to subdivide some edgeeofT, then the split S=
A
Bassociated with egives rise to precisely two clusters,
namely Aand B.
Now let us look at the opposite problem of deﬁning a set of splits Sfor a given
set of clusters ConX. For a given cluster C, we could simply deﬁne the associated
split SasCversus the complement of C,t h a ti s ,a s S=C
(X−C). Unfortunately, this
assignment does not preserve incompatibilities. For example, the clusters {a,b}
and{b,c}onX={a,b,c}are incompatible, whereas the two splits associated in
the manner suggested,{a,b}
{c}and{a}
{b,c}, are not. T o address this problem, we add a
new (formal) outgroup taxon o/∈Xthat is then always placed in the split part that
contains the complement of a cluster. In other words, for every cluster Cwe deﬁne
the associated split as S=C
(X−C)∪{o}onX/prime=X∪{o}.
In the special case that the set of clusters Cis compatible, and thus corresponds to
some rooted phylogenetic tree T, we can obtain the set of associated splits directly
from TasS(T), after ﬁrst unrooting the tree.
Exercise5.4.3 (Number of splits and clusters) How many different splits and clusters
are possible on a set Xof n taxa?
5.4.1 Optimal compatible subsets
LetSbe a set of splits on X.I fS is incompatible, then there are two basic
computational problems that are sometimes of interest. The ﬁrst problem is toremove a minimum number of splits such that the remaining set of splits iscompatible:Problem 5.4.4 (Maximum compatibility problem) Determine a maximum-size
subset of splits S
/prime⊂Sthat is compatible.
The second problem is to remove a minimum number of taxa such that the set ofsplits induced on the remaining taxa is compatible:Problem 5.4.5 (Maximum compatible subset problem) Determine a maximum-
s i z es u b s e to ft a x a X
/prime⊂Xsuch that the set of splits S |X/primeinduced on X/primeis compatible.
It follows from the NP-completeness of the two analogous problems formulatedfor clusters in Section 6.2.1 that these two problems are NP-complete.

93 5.5 Split networks
Figure 5.4 A split network NonX={a,..., e}. Every leaf edge, and, in this example, also the edge
separating the taxa dand efrom the rest of the taxa, each represents a split in the same
way that they would in an unrooted phylogenetic tree. The two edges labeled 1together
represent the split{a,b}
{c,d,e}, whereas the two edges labeled 2represent the split{a,c}
{b,d,e}.
5.5 Split networks
As we have seen, any set of compatible splits (containing all trivial splits) cor-responds to an unrooted phylogenetic tree on X.I nt h i ss e c t i o n ,w ei n t r o d u c e
a mathematical generalization of the concept of an unrooted phylogenetic tree,called a split network, which can be used to represent an arbitrary, in particular,
incompatible, set of splits.
In a split network, we use one or more edges to represent a split. The set of edges
used to represent a given split Shas the property that deletion of all these edges
produces exactly two connected components, and, as in the case of phylogenetictrees, the two parts of Sare given by the sets of taxa that occur as labels of one
component, or the other, respectively. For an example, see Figure 5.4.
First we deﬁne the concept of a split graph. Think of this as the underlying
graph-theoretical concept, just like phylogenetic trees are based on the underlyinggraph-theoretical concept of a tree, as deﬁned in Chapter 1. A split network Nis
then obtained from such a graph by specifying a labeling of the leaves by taxa anda labeling of the edges by splits.
Below, we deﬁne a split graph as a ﬁnite, connected graph, together with an
edge coloring whose most important property is that deleting all edges of a ﬁxedcolor produces precisely two connected components. In a split network, all edgesof a given color represent one split Sand things are arranged such that the two
connected components separated by the edges are each labeled by the taxa of oneof the two parts of the split.
T o develop the necessary formal concepts, let G=(V,E) be a ﬁnite connected
graph. Further, let Kdenote a ﬁnite set of labels, which we call colors .A n edge
coloring is a mapping σ:E→Kthat has the property that no two adjacent edges
are given the same color. Such a mapping is called surjective , if it uses all colors
inK.

94 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Isometric coloring (b) Non-isometric coloring
Figure 5.5 (a) A split graph with an isometric coloring of its edges using the colors K={1,2,3}.A l l
shortest paths between any two nodes, for example vandw, contain the same set of colors.
(b) The coloring indicated here is not isometric; for example, one shortest path between v
andwhas colors 1and 3, whereas the other one has colors 2and 3. Additionally, there exists
a shortest path connecting the nodes uandwthat is not properly colored, as it contains
two edges with color 1.
Consider an undirected path,
P=(u0,e1={u0,u1},u1,e2={u1,u2},..., et={ut−1,ut},ut), (5.5)
containing exactly len( P)=tdifferent edges. We denote the set of colors that
occur in Pbyσ(P), deﬁned as
σ(P)={σ(e1),...,σ (et)} (5.6)
and call Pp r o p e r l y c o l o r e d ,i fa l le d g e si n Phave different colors, that is, if |σ(P)|=
t. We call an edge coloring σofGanisometric coloring , if for any two nodes, all
shortest paths between them are properly colored and use exactly the same set ofcolors (see Figure 5.5).
Deﬁnition 5.5.1 (Split graph) Asplit graph consists of a ﬁnite, simple, connected,
bipartite graph G =(V,E), together with an edge coloring σ:E→K that is sur-
jective and isometric.With this deﬁnition, we get the crucial property that deletion of all edges of anygiven color produces precisely two connected components [ 62]:
Theorem 5.5.2 (Deletion of split produces two components) Let (G=
(V,E),σ :E→K)be a split graph. For any color c ∈Kw e h a v e : t h e g r a p h G
c
obtained by deleting all edges of color c consists of precisely two connected components,which we denote by G
0c=(V0
c,E0
c)and G1c=(V1
c,E1
c).
Proof For two nodes vandwwe use d(v,w ) to denote the minimal number of
e d g e si na n yp a t hf r o m vtow, and we use σ(v,w ) to denote the set of colors that
occur in every shortest path from vtow.N o t et h a t σis an isometric coloring, so
d(v,w )=|σ(v,w )|for all v,w∈V.

95 5.5 Split networks
First we show that any path Pfromvtowuses all colors from σ(v,w ), by
induction on len( P)≥d(v,w ).
T o start the induction, assume len( P)=d(v,w ). In this case Pis a shortest
path from vtowand so the claim follows directly from the deﬁnition of σ(v,w ).
Now, assume that len( P)>d(v,w ) and so P=(v,e1,...,w/prime,et,w), for some
t>d(v,w ). Because Gis bipartite, we cannot have d(v,w )=d(v,w/prime) and so we
must either have
d(v,w )=d(v,w/prime)−1o r d(v,w )=d(v,w/prime)+1. (5.7)
In the ﬁrst case every shortest path from vtowcan be extended to a shortest
path from vtow/prime,i m p l y i n g
σ(v,w )⊆σ(v,w/prime). (5.8)
Now, because len( v,e1,..., et−1,w/prime)<len(P), we can apply the induction
hypothesis and obtain
σ(v,w )⊆σ(v,w/prime)⊆σ(v,e1,..., et−1,w/prime)⊆σ(P), (5.9)
as claimed.
In the other case, we have
σ(v,w )=σ(v,w/prime)∪{σ(et)}. (5.10)
Moreover, because len( v,e1,...,e t−1,w/prime)<len(P), we also have
σ(v,w/prime)⊆σ(v,e1,...,e t,w/prime). (5.11)
Putting these two observations together, we see that
σ(v,w )=σ(v,w/prime)˙∪{σ(et)}⊆σ (v,e1,...,e t−1,w/prime)˙∪{σ(et)}=σ (P),
(5.12)
as claimed.
The proved statement implies that any two nodes vandware in the same
connected component of Gcif and only if c/∈σ(v,w ) holds. This implies that
Gcmust have at least two components, as σis surjective. In the remainder of the
proof, we show that Gchasat most two components.
Consider an edge e={w/prime,w}that has color cand assume that P=
(v,e1,..., et,w/prime) is a shortest path from some node vtow/prime, then, as above,
there are two possible cases: (1) If d(v,w )=d(v,w/prime)+1, then vandw/primemust lie
in the same component of Gc, because (v, e1,..., et,w/prime,e,w) is a shortest path
fromvtow, which in turn implies (by the isometric property) that c=σ(e)/∈
{σ(e1),...,σ (et)}holds. (2) If d(v,w )=d(v,w/prime)−1, then any shortest path

96 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
S1={a,b,c}|{d,e,f}
S2={a,e,f}|{b,c,d}
S3={a,f}|{b,c,d,e}
S4={a,b,f}|{c,d,e}
(a) Split network N (b) Non-trivial splits (c) Split S2={a,e,f}
{b,c,d}
Figure 5.6 (a) A split network Nrepresenting all trivial splits on X={a,..., f}and the four non-trivial
splits listed in (b). All the edges representing a particular non-trivial split are labeled by thatsplit. However, the labeling of edges by splits is usually omitted, as shown in (c). Edgesrepresenting the same split, such as the three edges shown in bold lines representing S
2,
are drawn parallel and with the same length.
(v,e/prime
1,...,e/prime
t−1,w)f r o mv towgives rise to a shortest path ( e/prime
1,...,e/prime
t−1,e)f r o m
vtow/prime.T h i si m p l i e s ,a sa b o v e ,t h a t c=σ(e)/∈{σ(e/prime
1),...,σ (e/prime
t−1)}=σ(v,w )
holds.
So, in Gcevery node vis connected either to wor tow/prime, but not to both of these
nodes. This implies that Gch a sa tm o s tt w oc o m p o n e n t s . /square
A split network NonXis obtained from a split graph by labeling its nodes by a
taxon set Xand labeling its edges by a set of splits SonX[62]:
Deﬁnition 5.5.3 (Split network) LetSbe a set of splits on X.Asplit network N=
(V,E,σ,λ )that represents Sis given by a split graph (G=(V,E),σ :E→S)
and a node labeling λ:X→V, with the property that for every split S =A|Bi n
Swe have:
A=/uniondisplay
v∈V0
Sλ−1(v)and B =/uniondisplay
v∈V1
Sλ−1(v), (5.13)
(or vice versa), in other words, deletion of all edges of color S produces a graph consistingof precisely two connected components, one containing all nodes labeled with elementsof A and the other containing all nodes labeled with elements of B.
Formally, all edges representing a given split Sare labeled by that split. In
drawings, however, the labeling or coloring of the edges is usually omitted andit is customary, instead, to draw all edges representing the same split as parallellines of the same length, so as to help make clear which edges belong together, seeFigure 5.6. Such a representation is always possible, see Section 13.8.
Note that any unrooted phylogenetic tree Tcan be regarded as a split network:
Deﬁne σ:E→Sasσ(e):=σ
T(e), then it is obvious that deletion of all edges

97 5.6 The canonical split network
(a) Split network N1 (b) Split network N2
Figure 5.7 The two split networks N1and N2shown in (a) and (b) both represent the same set of splits
S, consisting of the two non-trivial splits{a1,a2}
{b1,b2,c1,c2}and{a1,a2,b1,b2}
{c1,c2}, together with all trivial
splits on X={a1,a2,b1,b2,c1,c2}. Because Sis compatible, there exists a corresponding
split network that is a tree, namely N1. The split network N2also represents S, but is not a
tree.
(that is, in fact, only one edge) of color S=σT(e) produces two connected com-
ponents which correspond to the two parts of S. So in this sense, split networks are
a generalization of unrooted phylogenetic trees. Moreover, we have:Lemma 5.5.4 (Split networks and compatiblity) As e to fs p l i t s SonXis compatible
if and only if there exists a split network N representing Sthat is a tree.
Figure 5.7demonstrates that the split network associated with a set of splits is not
uniquely deﬁned and also that a split network representation of a compatible set ofsplits need not necessarily be a tree, although a tree representation for a compatibleset of splits always exists. We would like to point out, however, that both algorithmsdescribed in Chapter 7for constructing a split network for a given set of splits
produce a tree, when run with a compatible set of splits as input.Exercise 5.5.5 (Draw a split network) Consider the set of splits SonX={a,..., g}
given by
{a,b}
{c,d,e,f,g},{a,b,c}
{d,e,f,g},{a,b,e,f,g}
{c,d},{a,f,g}
{b,c,d,e}, (5.14)
and all trivial splits on X. Draw a split network N that represents S.
5.6 The canonical split network
LetSbe a set of splits on X. The deﬁnition of a split network (Deﬁnition 5.5.3)g i v e s
no indication of how one might obtain such a split network for S. T o address this,
in this section we discuss how to deﬁne a canonical split network N that represents
S, which is also called the Buneman graph [17].

98 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
Deﬁnition 5.6.1 (Projection) LetS={S1,..., Sk}be a set of splits on X.W ec a l l
av e c t o r p =(D1,..., Dk)of length k a projection ofS, if it has the two following
properties:
(i)The i-th component of p consists of one of the two split parts of the i-th split
Si=Ai
BiinS, that is, we have either D i=Aior D i=Bi,f o ra l li =1,.... k.
(ii)Any two components of p have a non-empty intersection, that is, we have D i∩
Dj/negationslash=∅ for all i ,j=1,...,k.
The core of a projection p =(D1,..., Dk)is deﬁned as the set◦p=/intersectiontextk
i=1Diof all
such taxa that are contained in all components of p.
We have the following easy result:
Lemma 5.6.2 (Every taxon in exactly one core) LetSbe a set of splits on X. Then
every taxon x in Xis contained in the core◦p of exactly one projection p of S.
Proof LetS={S1,..., Sk}be a set of splits on X. Consider any taxon xinX.F o r
i=1..., kletDibe the split part of split Sithat contains x.T h e n xis contained in
every component of p=(D1,..., Dk) and so pis a projection and xis contained
in◦p.
Now, assume that there exists a second projection q/negationslash=pw h o s ec o r ea l s oc o n t a i n s
x.T h e n pand qdiffer on at least one component, say the i-th component. The
i-th component of pcontains one part of the split Siand qcontains the other
part. As the two split parts are disjoint, they cannot both contain xand so xcannot
be contained in both cores, implying that such a second projection qdoes not
exist. /square
We can now deﬁne the canonical split network for a given set of splits:
Deﬁnition 5.6.3 (Buneman graph) LetSbe a set of splits on X. The canonical split
network orBuneman graph associated with Sis the split network N =(V,E,σ,λ )
that is deﬁned as follows [17 ]:
(i)The node set V is given by the set of all projections P(S)ofS.
(ii)Any two nodes p and p/primeare connected by an edge e of color σ(e)=ii nEi fa n d
only if p and p/primediffer precisely in their i-th component.
(iii) For each taxon x in X,w es e t λ(x)=p, where p is the unique projection whose
core contains x, i.e. with x ∈◦p.
As an example, consider the set of splits
S={S1,S2,S3,S4}=/braceleftbigg{a}
{b,c,d,e},{a,b,c}
{d,e},{a,b,d}
{c,e},{a,c,e}
{b,d}/bracerightbigg
(5.15)

99 5.6 The canonical split network
Figure 5.8 The canonical split network (Buneman graph) Nfor a set of splits SonX={a,b,c,d,e}
described in the text.
on the taxon set X={a,b,c,d,e}. There are exactly seven projections for Sand
these provide the set of nodes for the canonical split network Nassociated with S:
p1=/parenleftbig
{a}, {a,b,c},{a,b,d},{a,c,e}/parenrightbig
,
p2=/parenleftbig
{b,c,d,e},{a,b,c},{a,b,d},{a,c,e}/parenrightbig
,
p3=/parenleftbig
{b,c,d,e},{a,b,c},{a,b,d},{b,d}/parenrightbig
,
p4=/parenleftbig
{b,c,d,e},{a,b,c},{c,e},{a,c,e}/parenrightbig
,
p5=/parenleftbig
{b,c,d,e},{d,e},{a,b,d},{a,c,e}/parenrightbig
,
p6=/parenleftbig
{b,c,d,e},{d,e},{a,b,d},{b,d}/parenrightbig
, and
p7=/parenleftbig
{b,c,d,e},{d,e}, {c,e},{a,c,e}/parenrightbig
. (5.16)
The cores of these projections are:◦p1={a},◦p2=∅,◦p3={b},◦p4={c},◦p5=
∅,◦p6={d},a n d◦p7={e}. Thus, the mapping of taxa to nodes is λ(a)=p1,λ(b)=
p3,λ(c)=p4,λ(d)=p6andλ(e)=p7. The set of edges is given by all pairs of
nodes that disagree on precisely one component: e1={p1,p2},e2={p2,p3},
e3={p2,p4},e4={p2,p5},e5={p3,p6},e6={p4,p7},e7={p5,p6}and e8=
{p5,p7}. Each edge is colored by the component on which the two incident nodes
disagree on. In this example, the coloring of edges is σ(e1)=1,σ(e2)=σ(e7)=4,
σ(e3)=σ(e8)=3a n dσ(e4)=σ(e5)=σ(e6)=2. The resulting split network is
shown in Figure 5.8.
Exercise 5.6.4 (Buneman graph and compatibility) Show that the Buneman graph
of a compatible set of splits Sis an unrooted phylogenetic tree.
Lemma 5.6.5 (Buneman graph is a split network) LetSbe a set of splits on X. The
Buneman graph for Sis a split network for S.
Proof We must show that the Buneman graph is a split graph as deﬁned in
Deﬁnition 5.5.1 and then the claim follows with the help of Theorem 5.5.2.
LetS={S1,..., Sk}be a set of splits on Xand let Nbe the corresponding
Buneman graph.
We ﬁrst show that the edge coloring on Nis surjective. Consider any number
i=1,..., k. We must show that Ncontains an edge that has color i,t h a ti s ,t h e r e
exist two projections pand qthat differ only on their i-th component. Let p0be

100 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
some projection of S.L e t A={Dj|Dj⊂Di}be the set of components of p0
that are subsets of Di, not including Di,a n dl e t B={Dj|Dj/negationslash⊂Di}be the set of
components that are not subsets of Di.D e ﬁ n e ¯A={X−Dj|Dj∈A}as the set
of complements of all the components in A. By deﬁnition of Aand Bwe have the
following: Each set in ¯Aintersects every component in B.M o r e o v e r ,e a c hs e ti n ¯A
intersects all other sets in ¯A.F i n a l l y , DiandX−Diintersects all sets in ¯Aand B.
Hence, the vector pobtained by replacing each component of p0that is listed in
Aby its complement is a projection. Similarly, the vector qobtained by replacing
each component of p0thatSin the set A∪{Di}by its complement is a projection.
Aspand qdiffer only by their i-th component, we are done.
Our goal is to show that the the graph is connected, bipartite and the edge
coloring is isometric, by proving the following statement: For any two nodes pand
qthat differ on exactly dcomponents, the length of any shortest path P(and such
a path always exists) from ptoqisdand each of the indices i1,..., idon which p
and qdiffer occurs as an edge color in P.
The proof is by induction on the number dof components on which pand q
differ. If d=1, then there is indeed a path from ptoqconsisting of a single edge
eand that edge is colored by the index of the component on which the two nodes
differ.
Now, assume that d>1 and that any two nodes that differ on d−1 components
are connected by a path of length d−1 colored by the indices of the components
on which the two nodes differ. Let pand qbe two nodes that differ on exactly d
components.
LetDibe a split part of some split Sithat occurs as the i-th component of pbut
not of q, and assume that Dihas minimum size with this property. Consider the
vector p/primethat is obtained from pby by replacing Diby the complementary split
partX−Di.
AsDiis minimal, none of the other components of pcan be completely contained
inDiand so they all must contain at least one element that is not contained in
Di. This implies that p/primeis a valid projection and hence a node of the Buneman
graph.
Because pand qdisagree on dcomponents and because X−Diis the i-th
component of q, it follows that p/primeand qdisagree on only d−1 components. By
assumption, all shortest paths from p/primetoqhave length d−1 and the edges are
colored by the d−1 indices of the components on which the two nodes differ,
none colored by the index of Disince p/primeand qdo not differ on Di.
Because pand p/primediffer by only one component, they are connected by an edge
inN, which can be used to extend any shortest path from p/primetoqby one edge to
obtain a path from ptoqthat has dedges and ddifferent colors. Hence, there
exists ap a t hf r o m vtowwith the desired properties.

101 5.6 The canonical split network
It remains to be shown that allshortest paths from vtowhave the desired
properties. T o this end, consider an arbitrary path Pof length dfrom ptoqand
letp/primebe the second node in the path. By assumption, p/primeis connected to qby a
path containing d−1 edges, each colored by a different index and none colored
by the index of the component on which pand p/primediffer. Hence, Phasddifferent
colors.
Let us demonstrate now that Nis bipartite. Chose a ﬁxed taxon xinX.T h e
parity of a projection pis set to 0, if the number of components of pthat contain
the taxon xis even, and is set to 1, otherwise. Using this measure, we can partition
the set of nodes Vof the Buneman graph in two disjoint subsets V1and V2such
that for every edge e∈Eone of the endpoints lies in V1and the other endpoint
lies in V2,i nt h ef o l l o w i n gw a y :L e t V1and V2be the set of nodes with odd and even
parity, respectively. Then, for each pair of nodes u,vinV1(or in V2), there does
not exist an edge connecting them since they differ on more than one component.This completes the proof that the Buneman graph is a split graph as deﬁned inDeﬁnition 5.5.1.
T o prove that the Buneman graph is a split network, we need to show for the node
labeling λ:X→Vand for every split S=A|BinSthat the deletion of all edges
of color Sproduces a graph consisting of precisely two connected components, one
containing all nodes labeled with elements of Aand the other containing all nodes
labeled with elements of B(see Deﬁnition 5.5.1). Theorem 5.5.2 ensures that, for
each split Sof a split set Srepresented by N,b yd e l e t i n ga l le d g e so fc o l o r Swe
obtain a graph N
Sconsisting of precisely two connected components N0
Sand N1
S.
We need to prove that all nodes labeled with elements of A(or of B) are contained
inN0
S(orN1
S, respectively).
In the proof of Theorem 5.5.2, we showed that any two nodes pand qare
contained in the same connected component of NSif and only if S/∈σ(p,q)
holds. For every pair of nodes pand qsuch that λ−1(p)=aandλ−1(q)=b, with
ainAand binB, it holds that pand qdiffer on the split S. As demonstrated
above, this implies that S∈σ(p,q), so pand qare not in the same connected
component of N0
Sand N1
S. Since this holds for each pair of nodes pand qinVand
for every split, this concludes the proof. /square
LetSbe a set of splits on X. How many nodes and edges might the canonical
split network contain? If the incompatibility graph IG(S) contains a clique of size
k, then any one of the 2kpossible choices of split parts gives rise to a node in the
network and thus the number of nodes and edges of the network is exponential inthe number of splits in the worst case.
In Chapter 7we discuss how to compute the Buneman graph using the convex
hull algorithm.

102 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
{a,b,d,e,h}|{c,f,g}
{a,c,d,e,g,h}|{b,f}
{a,c,e,g}|{b,d,f,h}
{a,c,g}|{b,d,e,f,h}
{a,c,e,f,g}|{b,d,h}
{a,e,h}|{b,c,d,f,g}
(a) Circular splits (b) Circular ordering (c) Planar networ k
Figure 5.9 (a) A set of six circular splits SonX={a,b,..., h}. (b) An arrangement of the taxa around a
circle such that every split S=A|B∈Scan be realized by a straight line through the circle
that separates the two split parts Aand B. A circular ordering is given by (a,g,c,f,b,d,h,e).
(c) An outer-labeled planar split network representing S.
{a,b}|{c,d,e,f,g,h}
{a,b,c,d,e,f}|{g,h}
{a,b,c,f,g,h}|{d,e}
{a,e,f,h}|{b,c,d,g}
(a) Non-circular splits (b) Non-planar networ k
Figure 5.10 (a) A set of four non-circular splits SonX={a,b,..., h}. (b) A non-planar split network
representing S.
5.7 Circular splits and planar split networks
One practical problem that arises when working with split networks is that thenetworks can be very complicated and thus difﬁcult to visualize in a comprehensibleway. Hence, a number of restricted classes of sets of splits have been introducedin an attempt to avoid overly complicated networks. The two most important arecircular splits, which are the focus of this section, and weakly compatible splits,
which we introduce in the next section.
Informally, a set of splits SonXis called circular, if the taxa in Xcan be placed
around a circle in such a way that each split S=
A
Bcan be realized by a line through
the circle that separates the plane into two half-planes, one containing all taxa in
Aand the other containing all taxa in B(see Figure 5.9). An example of a non-
circular set of splits and the corresponding split network is shown in Figure 5.10.
More formally [ 9]:
Deﬁnition 5.7.1 (Circular splits) As e to fs p l i t s SonXis called circular,i ft h e r e
exists a linear ordering (x1,..., xn)of the elements of XforSsuch that each split

103 5.7 Circular splits and planar split networks
Figure 5.11 (a) An input matrix Mfor the Consecutive Ones problem that corresponds to the set of
splits shown in Figure 5.9(a). (b) A solution obtained by permuting the columns of Min
the order suggested by Figure 5.9(b).
S∈Shas the form
S={xp,xp+1,..., xq}
X−{xp,xp+1,..., xq}, (5.17)
for appropriately chosen 1<p≤q≤n.
We call such an ordering ( x1,..., xn)acircular ordering forS,a si th o l d st h a t
(x1,..., xn) is a circular ordering for Sif and only if ( xn,xn−1,..., x1)a n d
(x2,x3,..., xn,x1) both are. How to determine whether a set of splits Sis cir-
cular? This is equivalent to a well-known problem in computer science:Problem 5.7.2 (Consecutive Ones problem) Let M be a binary matrix. Does there
exist a permutation of the columns of the matrix M such that in each row, all ones inthe row occur in a single consecutive run?It is straightforward to translate the problem of determining whether Sis circular
into an instance of the Consecutive Ones problem. Simply deﬁne a binary matrix
Min which each row rcorresponds to some split S∈Sand every column c
corresponds to some taxon x∈X.T h e ns e t M(r,c)=1 if and only if Sseparates
xfrom the taxon represented by the ﬁrst column of M.
Exercise 5.7.3 (Circular ordering and Consecutive Ones) Prove the following state-
ment: There exists a circular ordering of XforSif and only if a solution of the
Consecutive Ones problem exists for M. Hint: construct a binary matrix M whoserows represent splits and whose columns represent taxa (see Figure 5.11).
The Consecutive Ones problem can be solved in linear time [ 23]. However, if no
circular ordering exists for a given set of splits SonX,t h e no n em i g h tt r yt o
determine a solution that is as good as possible. For our purposes, an appropriateoptimization goal is to ﬁnd an ordering of Xthat minimizes the number of runs

104 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
of ones in the matrix M.T h i sp r o b l e m ,k n o w na st h e Optimal Consecutive Ones
problem, is NP-hard.
A useful heuristic for ﬁnding an optimal circular ordering for a set of non-
circular splits SonXis to deﬁne a distance matrix DonXby setting the distance
between any two taxa aand bequal to the sum of all weights of the splits that
separate them. This distance matrix Dis then provided as input to the neighbor-
net algorithm, described in Section 10.4,w h i c ho u t p u t sa no r d e r i n go f X,t h a ti s
guaranteed to be circular, whenever the given input set Sis circular [32 ].
Circular split systems are of particular interest because they can always be repre-
sented graphically in an appealing way, namely by a split network that is drawn inthe plane without any edges crossing and with all labeled nodes appearing aroundthe outside of the network (see Figure 5.9c), conforming to the following:
Deﬁnition 5.7.4 (Outer-labeled planar) L e tGb eag r a p hi nw h i c hs o m eo ft h e
nodes are labeled. We call G outer-labeled planar, if there exists a drawing of G in
the plane such that no two edges intersect and all labeled nodes lie on the outside ofthe graph.With this deﬁnition we have [62]:Theorem 5.7.5 (Circular implies outer-labeled planar) As e to fs p l i t s SonX=
{x
1,..., xn}is circular if and only if it can be represented by a split network N that is
outer-labeled planar.Proof IfSis circular, then we can position the elements of X={x
1,..., xn}
around a circle in the plane in such a way that every split S∈Sis induced by a
chord of the circle. Applying de Bruijn’s “dualization principle” [ 29]t ot h es e to f
these chords produces a “zonotopal graph” that can be labeled so as to form anouter-labeled planar split network for S[20].
Now assume that we are given a split network Nthat is embedded in the plane
such that all labels occur on the outer boundary of the network. A circular orderingis given by the order in which the taxa are encountered when traveling once aroundthe outside of the embedded network.
/square
As shown in Section 10.4, the neighbor-net algorithm, which is a widely used
method for computing a set of incompatible splits from a distance matrix, alwaysproduces a circular set of splits and thus can always be represented by an outer-labeled planar split network.Exercise 5.7.6 (Splits from one or two trees) Prove that the set of splits obtained
from a single unrooted phylogenetic tree is always circular. Construct an example thatshows that the set of splits taken from two unrooted phylogenetic trees is not necessarilycircular.

105 5.8 Weak compatibility
As we saw above, the number of nodes and edges of a split network Nrepresenting
a general set of splits can be exponential in the number of splits. However, a set ofcircular splits can be represented by a split network that is of quadratic size only:Lemma 5.7.7 (Circular splits have quadratic-size network) IfSis a set of m circular
splits on X, then the number of nodes and edges in an outer-labeled planar split network
N representing Sis at most quadratic in m.
Proof Because Sis circular, we can arrange all taxa on a circle in such a way that
every split S=
A
Bcorresponds to some line lSthat passes through the circle and
separates all taxa in Afrom all taxa in B. We assume that all such lines are in
general position , that is, that no more than two lines intersect at any given point (see
Figure 5.9b for an example). This can always be achieved by allowing ourselves to
bend lines locally to avoid more than two lines meeting in a point. The collection oflines is then technically what is known as a pseudo-line arrangement . As indicated
in the proof of Theorem 5.7.5, a split network Ncan be obtained by dualization
of the complete (pseudo) line arrangement. In this process, each line lgives rise to
t+1e d g e s ,w h e r e tis the number of intersection points that lshares with other
lines in the arrangement. As tis at most m−1, it follows that Ncontains only a
quadratic number of edges and, thus also, of nodes.
/square
Note that the canonical construction is less suited for circular split systems.
Indeed, the canonical split network (Buneman graph) Nassociated with a set of
splitsSonXis not necessary planar when Sis circular. This is a main reason why
we make the distinction between the concept of a split network and a canonicalsplit network. In Section 7.2, we present the circular network algorithm, which is
guaranteed to produce an outer-labeled planar split network Nwhen given a set of
circular splits SonX.
5.8 Weak compatibility
As discussed above, any twosplits S1=A1|B1and S2=A2|B2onXare called
compatible if one of the four possible intersections, A1∩A2,A1∩B2,B1∩A2
orB1∩B2is empty. One possible mathematical generalization of compatibility
is known as weak compatibility [9] and is deﬁned as a relation between any three
splits, requiring that certain intersections of the split parts are empty, as we discussbelow.
Weak compatibility is an important concept for two reasons. First, the set of splits
produced by the split decomposition method, which we describe in Section 5.9,
is always weakly compatible. The same is also true for the (less widely known)parsimony splits method, which is presented in Section 9.3. Second, in practice the

106 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Venn diagram for compatibility (b) Venn diagram for weak compatiblity
Figure 5.12 (a) Two splits S1=A1
B1and S2=A2
B2onXare compatible, if and only if one of the four
regions in this Venn diagram is empty. (b) Three splits S1=A1
B1,S2=A2
B2and S3=A3
B3onX
are weakly compatible if and only if at least one of the gray regions and one of the whiteregions in this Venn diagram are empty.
resulting split networks are often quite close to being planar, as they usually haveonly a few edges crossing over each other and do not contain any “high-dimensionalcubes” , which may occur for completely unrestricted sets of splits.Deﬁnition 5.8.1 (W eak compatibility) A set of splits SonXis called weakly
compatible,i fa n y three distinct splits in Sare weakly compatible. Three such splits
S
1=A1
B1,S2=A2
B2,a n dS 3=A3
B3are called weakly compatible ,i f
(i)at least one of the following four intersections is empty:
A1∩A2∩A3,A1∩B2∩B3,B1∩A2∩B3and B 1∩B2∩A3,
(5.18)
and, symmetrically,
(ii)at least one of the following four intersections is empty:
B1∩B2∩B3,B1∩A2∩A3,A1∩B2∩A3and A 1∩A2∩B3.
(5.19)
In Figure 5.12 we show two Venn diagrams illustrating the deﬁnitions of compati-
bility and weak compatibility. If three splits are not weakly compatible, then it canhappen that every possible intersection of any three split parts is non-empty andthe split network required to represent the three splits consists of the eight edges ofa cube.Exercise 5.8.2 (Number of weakly compatible splits) What is the maximum num-
ber of weakly compatible splits that is possible on a taxon set of size 4,5or6?
Consider two unrooted phylogenetic trees T
1and T2onXand let Sbe the set of
splits obtained from both trees. Is Sweakly compatible? This question can easily
be answered using Figure 5.12: Given any three splits S1,S2and S3,a tl e a s to n e

107 5.9 The split decomposition
Figure 5.13 For a circular set of splits Swith circular ordering (x1,..., xn), we represent three distinct
splits S1=A1
B1,S2=A2
B2and S3=A3
B3by lines in a configuration in which every pair of lines
intersects.
pair of splits, S1and S2, say, must come from the same tree and is thus compatible.
Hence, one of the four regions shown in (a) is empty. Comparison of (a) and (b)shows that every such region contains both a gray and a white region of the Venndiagram shown in (b). Therefore, one gray and one white region shown in (b) mustbe empty and so the three splits are weakly compatible. Moreover, we have that anyset of circular splits is weakly compatible:Lemma 5.8.3 (Circular implies weakly compatible) LetSbe a set of splits on X.I f
Sis circular, then Sis weakly compatible.
Proof LetSbe a circular set of splits on Xand assume that we have placed the taxa
around a circle in such a way that each split in Sis represented by a line through
the circle. Consider three distinct splits S
1=A1
B1,S2=A2
B2and S3=A3
B3.I fa l lt h r e e
lines representing these splits intersect each other, as show in Figure 5.13,t h e n
the intersections A1∩A2∩A3and B1∩B2∩B3are both empty. This implies
that the three splits are weakly compatible, as the one intersection is coloredgray and the other intersection is colored white in Figure 5.12(b). Otherwise,
assume that (at least) two lines do not intersect, then the two corresponding splitsare compatible and it follows that all three splits must be weakly compatible,using the same argument as applied above in the analysis of the situation of twotrees.
/square
5.9 The split decomposition
The ﬁrst practical method proposed for computing a set of incompatible splitsfrom evolutionary data was the split decomposition method, introduced in [ 9]. As
we will see, the split decomposition method takes as input a distance matrix andproduces as output a set of weighted splits that is weakly compatible. T o motivatethis approach, we ﬁrst discuss the related Buneman tree method as proposed by
Bandelt and Dress [ 9].

108 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
5.9.1 The Buneman tree
One way to determine whether a given set of splits SonXis compatible is to check
for each quadruple of taxa Q⊆Xand every pair of splits S1and S2whether the
splits induced by S1and S2onQare compatible:
Lemma 5.9.1 (Quadruple condition for compatibility) Two distinct splits S 1and
S2onXare compatible if and only if the set {S1|Q,S2|Q}contains at most one
non-trivial split for every quadruple Q on X.
Proof LetS1=A1
B1and S2=A2
B2be two splits on X.
First consider the case that S1and S2are compatible. Assume that the claim is
not true, then there exists a quadruple of distinct taxa Q={w,x,y,z}onXsuch
that S1|Qand S2|Qare two distinct, non-trivial splits on Q. Moreover, assume,
without loss of generality, that {w,x}⊆ A1and{y,z}⊆ B1hold. Because S1|Q
and S2|Qare distinct, we can also assume, again without loss of generality, either
that{w,y}⊆ A2and{x,z}⊆ B2hold or that {w,z}⊆ A2and{x,y}⊆ B2hold.
In either case, we have A1∩A2/negationslash=∅,A1∩B2/negationslash=∅,B1∩A2/negationslash=∅ and B1∩B2/negationslash=∅,
and therefore S1and S2are incompatible, a contradiction. Hence, in this case S1|Q
and S2|Qcannot be two distinct, non-trivial splits on Q.
Now consider the case that S1and S2are incompatible. Then, there exist four
distinct taxa w,x,y,z∈Xsuch that w∈A1∩A2,x∈A1∩B2,y∈B1∩A2and
z∈B1∩B2hold. With Q={w,x,y,z},t h i si m p l i e s S1|Q={w,x}
{y,z}and S2|Q=
{w,y}
{x,z}, as required. /square
In other words, two splits S1and S2onXare compatible, unless there exists a
quadruple QonXthat induces one non-trivial split S1|QonS1and a different non-
trivial split S2|QonS2. A non-trivial split{w,x}
{y,z}on a quadruple Q={w,x,y,z}is
called a quartet topology . The lemma suggests the following strategy for constructing
a set of compatible splits on X:
/squaresolidFor each quadruple QonXchoose one of the three possible quartet topologies
and denote it by ˆQ.
/squaresolidConstruct the set of all splits Sthat respect the chosen quartet topologies, that is,
determine every split S=A
BonXfor which S|Q=ˆQholds for all quadruples
QonXwith|Q∩A|=| Q∩B|=2.
Exercise 5.9.2 (Compatibility) Show that the set of splits Scomputed in this way is
compatible.Assume that we are given a distance matrix DonX. How to select a quartet topology
for each quadruple Q⊆X? For a given quadruple Q={w,x,y,z}⊆X,consider

109 5.9 The split decomposition
(a) (b)
Figure 5.14 A phylogenetic tree on four taxa {w,x,y,z}. (a) Here we see that d(w,y)+d(x,z)−
d(w,x)−d(y,z)covers the length of the central edge eexactly twice, and thus that the
Buneman index ˆβD/parenleftbig{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbig
equals the length of e. (b) Similarly, in this case d(w,z)+d(x,y)−
d(w,x)−d(y,z)does so, too.
the three possible sums of pairs of distances on Q:
d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)+d(x,z)a n dd (w,z)+d(x,y). (5.20)
We choose the quartet topology corresponding to the smallest of these three values.For example, if d(w,x)+d(y,z) is smallest, then we set ˆQ=
{w,x}
{y,z}.I fm o r et h a n
one quartet topology takes on the smallest value, then no topology is chosen for thequadruple. The motivation for this choice is the desire to minimize the distancesbetween taxa on the same side of a split.
T o describe this more formally, consider any four taxa w,x,yand zwith
{w,x}∩{ y,z}=∅ , but not necessarily w/negationslash=xory/negationslash=z. We deﬁne the (quartet)
Buneman index ofˆQ=
{w,x}
{y,z}with respect to Das:
ˆβD/parenleftbig{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbig
=1
2/parenleftbig
min{d (w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)}
−d(w,x)−d(y,z)/parenrightbig
. (5.21)
It follows from this deﬁnition that the Buneman index is positive for, at most,
one quartet topology on any given quadruple; and this is the one that we choose.T o understand the quartet Buneman index, note that it measures the length of thecentral edge in an edge-weighted phylogenetic tree on four taxa, as illustrated inFigure 5.14.
Now, assume we are given a distance matrix DonX.W ed e ﬁ n et h eBuneman
index of a split S=
A
BonXas the minimum quartet Buneman index of all the
quadruples induced by S:
βD(S)=min/braceleftBig
ˆβD/parenleftbig{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbig
|w,x∈A,y,z∈B/bracerightBig
. (5.22)
LetSbe the set of all splits on Xthat have a positive Buneman index. It follows
from the deﬁnitions and Lemma 5.9.1 thatSis compatible. In Section 5.9.4,
we describe an algorithm that can be used to ﬁnd all such splits efﬁciently. The

110 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
corresponding unrooted phylogenetic tree is called the Buneman tree forDand
the following result can be proven [9]:Lemma 5.9.3 (Buneman tree on additive distances) Let D be a distance matrix on
X. The distances in the Buneman tree T equal the distances in D, if and only if D is
additive.Although this result shows that the Buneman tree method computes the correcttree for any distance matrix Dthat satisﬁes the four-point condition, the method
is rarely used in practice. This is because violations of the four-point conditionusually lead to a loss of splits and the resulting tree is often very unresolved.
5.9.2 A four-point condition for weak compatibility
In the previous section, we saw that if a set of splits SonXhas the property that
it gives rise to at most one quartet topology for each quadruple QonX,t h e n
this property sufﬁces to ensure that the given set of splits Sis compatible. In this
section, we show that prescribing up to two of the three possible quartet topologies
for every quadruple QonXensures that a given set of splits is weakly compatible.
We start with the following observation [ 9]:
Lemma 5.9.4 (Quadruple condition for weak compatibility) Three distinct splits
S1,S2and S 3onXare weakly compatible if and only if the set {S1|Q,S2|Q,S3|Q}
contains at most two different non-trivial splits on Q for every quadruple Q on X.
Exercise 5.9.5 (Proof) Prove Lemma 5.9.4.
This result suggests the following strategy for constructing a set of weakly compat-ible splits on X:
/squaresolidFor each quadruple QonXwe make a ﬁxed choice of up to two of the three
possible quartet topologies.
/squaresolidConstruct the set of all splits Sthat respect the chosen quartet topologies, that is,
determine every split S=A
BonXfor which S|Qequals one of the chosen quartet
topologies on Q, for all quadruples QonXwith|Q∩A|=| Q∩B|=2.
Lemma 5.9.6 (Result is weakly compatibility) The set of splits Scomputed by the
described strategy is weakly compatible.Proof LetSbe a set of splits on Xcomputed using the described approach. T o
obtain a contradiction, assume that Sis not weakly compatible. Then, there exist
three splits S
1=A1
B1,S2=A2
B2and S3=A3
B3such that either the four intersections
A1∩A2∩A3,A1∩B2∩B3,B1∩A2∩B3and B1∩B2∩A3are all non-empty,
or the four intersections B1∩B2∩B3,B1∩A2∩A3,A1∩B2∩A3and A1∩
A2∩B3are all non-empty, or both. Assume, without loss of generality, that the

111 5.9 The split decomposition
ﬁrst case holds. Then we can choose four distinct taxa w∈A1∩A2∩A3,x∈
A1∩B2∩B3,y∈B1∩A2∩B3and z∈B1∩B2∩A3and set Q={w,x,y,z}.
We have S1|Q={w,x}
{y,z},S2|Q={w,y}
{x,z}and S3|Q={w,z}
{x,y}. This is a contradiction to
the construction of S. /square
5.9.3 Weak compatibility and D-splits
As we see later, there are two methods that are based on the above approach,namely the split decomposition method described in Section 5.9.4 of this chapter
and the parsimony splits method, presented in Section 9.3. In preparation of the
split decomposition method, our aim now is to introduce the concept of a D-split
and to prove the key result that D-splits are always weakly compatible.
Assume we are given a distance matrix DonX. How to select up to two quartet
topologies for each quadruple Q⊆X? For a given quadruple Q={w,x,y,z}⊆
X, consider the three possible sums of distances on Q:
d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)+d(x,z)a n d d(w,z)+d(x,y). (5.23)
Generalizing the method discussed in the previous section, we choose all (that is,zero, one or two) quartet topologies for which the corresponding sum is smallerthan the largest sum. More precisely, if the three sums are all different, or if two areequal and smaller than the third, then we choose the two topologies associated withthe two smaller sums. If two are equal and larger than the third, then we choose thetopology associated with the third value. If all three values are the same, then noneof the three topologies is chosen. For example, if d(w,x)+d(y,z)<d(w,y)+
d(x,z)=d(w,z)+d(x,y), then we (only) choose the quartet topology
{w,x}
{y,z}.
Consider any four taxa w,x,yandzwith{w,x}∩{ y,z}=∅ , but not necessarily
w/negationslash=xory/negationslash=z. We deﬁne the (quartet) isolation index ofˆQ={w,x}
{y,z}with respect
toDas:
ˆαD/parenleftbig{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbig
=1
2/parenleftBig
max/braceleftBig
d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)
+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)/bracerightBig
−d(w,x)−d(y,z)/parenrightBig
.(5.24)
Note that the quartet isolation index is always non-negative, because the quantitythat is subtracted also occurs as an argument of the maximum function. Also,because one of the three sums has to be largest, the quartet isolation index canonly be positive for at most two quartet topologies, and these are the ones that wechoose.
We deﬁne the isolation index α
D(S)of a split S =A
BonXas the minimum
isolation index of all the quartets induced by S:
αD(S)=min{ˆαD/parenleftbig{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbig
|w,x∈A,y,z∈B}≥0. (5.25)

112 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
A split Swhose isolation index αD(S) is greater than 0 is called a D-split .B y
construction, we have:Lemma 5.9.7 (D-splits are weakly compatible) Let D be a distance matrix on X.
The set of D-splits on Xis weakly compatible.
LetXbe a set of taxa. A split Son a proper subset of Xis called a partial split
onX. A split S
/prime=A/prime
B/primeis called an extension of a partial split S=A
B,i fA⊆A/primeand
B⊆B/prime.
An important observation is that the weight of any extension S/primeof a D-split S
never exceeds the weight of the extended split, that is, αD(S/prime)≤αD(S). Moreover,
the sum of weights of all full extensions of a given split never exceeds the weight ofthat split:Theorem 5.9.8 (Extension decreases weight) Let D be a distance matrix on X.L e t
S be a partial D-split and let /angbracketleftS/angbracketrightdenote the set of all full D-splits that extend S. We
have:
/summationdisplay
S/prime∈/angbracketleftS/angbracketrightαD(S/prime)≤αD(S). (5.26)
The proof of this key result is based on the analysis of the case in which a partialsplit is extended by a single taxon in the two possible ways:Lemma 5.9.9 (Extension lemma) Let D be a distance matrix on X={x
1,..., xn}
and let S =A
Bbe a D-split on the ﬁrst n −1taxa{x1,..., xn−1}.F o ra l la 1,a2∈A,
b1,b2∈Bw eh a v e :
αD/parenleftbigg{a1,a2,xn}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbigg
+αD/parenleftbigg{a1,a2}
{b1,b2,xn}/parenrightbigg
≤ˆαD/parenleftbigg{a1,a2}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbigg
. (5.27)
Proof For ease of notation, we use xyto denote the distance d(x,y)b e t w e e n
any two taxa xand y.L e tA
Bbe a split on {x1,..., xn−1}. Assume, for the sake of
contradiction, that the claimed inequality fails for some choice of a1,a2∈Aand
b1,b2∈B, that is, assume
αD/parenleftbigg{a1,a2,xn}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbigg
+αD/parenleftbigg{a1,a2}
{b1,b2,xn}/parenrightbigg
>ˆαD/parenleftbigg{a1,a2}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbigg
. (5.28)
Note that all three quantities are strictly positive, because neither term on the leftcan alone be larger than the right-hand term, by deﬁnition of the isolation index.
Consider the isolation index ˆα
D/parenleftbig{a1,xn}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbig
. Since this quantity is strictly positive,
we have that
1
2(max{a1b1+xnb2,a1b2+xnb1}−a1xn−b1b2)>0. (5.29)

113 5.9 The split decomposition
Assume, without loss of generality, that a1b2+xnb1≥a1b1+xnb2.T h e n
ˆαD/parenleftbigg{a1,xn}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbigg
=1
2(a1b2+xnb1−a1xn−b1b2). (5.30)
This implies
1
2(a1b2+xnb1−a1xn−b1b2+max{a1b1+a2xn,a1xn+a2b1}
−a1a2−b1xn)
=ˆαD/parenleftBig
{a1,xn}
{b1,b2}/parenrightBig
+ˆαD/parenleftBig
{a1,a2}
{b1,xn}/parenrightBig
≥αD/parenleftBig
{a1,a2,xn}
{b1,b2}/parenrightBig
+αD/parenleftBig
{a1,a2}
{b1,b2,xn}/parenrightBig
>ˆαD/parenleftBig
{a1,a2}
{b1,b2}/parenrightBig
=1
2(max{a1b1+a2b2,a1b2+a2b1}−a1a2−b1b2). (5.31)
Comparing the ﬁrst and last of these expressions we get
a1b2−a1xn+max{a1b1+a2xn,a1xn+a2b1}
>max{a1b1+a2b2,a1b2+a2b1}. (5.32)
F o rt h i si n e q u a l i t yt oh o l d ,w em u s th a v em a x {a1b1+a2xn,a1xn+a2b1}= a1b1+
a2xn, because otherwise the left-hand side of the inequality would yield
a1b2−a1xn+max{a1b1+a2xn,a1xn+a2b1}
=a1b2−a1xn+a1xn+a2b1
=a1b2+a2b1, (5.33)
which cannot be larger than the right-hand side of the inequality. In consequence,we have:
a
1b2−a1xn+a1b1+a2xn>max{a1b1+a2b2,a1b2+a2b1}, (5.34)
that is,
a1b2−a1xn+a1b1+a2xn>a1b2+a2b1and
a1b2−a1xn+a1b1+a2xn>a1b1+a2b2,(5.35)
which implies
a1b1+a2xn>a2b1+a1xnand a1b2+a2xn>a2b2+a1xn. (5.36)
By considering the isolation index ˆαD/parenleftbig{a2,xn}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbig
at the beginning of the proof, we
can also deduce the reverse of these two inequalities, thus obtaining a contradiction,showing that the lemma must be correct.
/square
With this lemma in hand, we can now prove Theorem 5.9.8 by induction:

114 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
Proof Assume we are given a distance matrix DonX={x1,..., xn}. We use
Xj={x1,..., xj}to denote the ﬁrst jelements of X.
T o start the induction, we ﬁrst show that the result is true for any D-split S=A
B
onXn−1={x1,..., xn−1}. T o this end, choose a1,a2∈Aandb1,b2∈Bsuch that
αD/parenleftbigA
B/parenrightbig
=ˆαD/parenleftbig{a1,a2}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbig
holds. Then we have:
αD/parenleftbigA∪{xn}
B/parenrightbig
+αD/parenleftbigA
B∪{xn}/parenrightbig
≤αD/parenleftbig{a1,a2,xn}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbig
+αD/parenleftbig{a1,a2}
{b1,b2,xn}/parenrightbig
≤ˆαD/parenleftbig{a1,a2}
{b1,b2}/parenrightbig
=αD/parenleftbigA
B/parenrightbig
, (5.37)
where the ﬁrst inequality follows by deﬁnition of the isolation index and the secondone by Lemma 5.9.9. Now, assume by induction that the claim is true for all D-splits
onX
j, with j≤n−1. By backward induction, we can show that this implies that
the claim holds for any D-split S=A
BonXj−1,t o o :
/summationtext/braceleftbig
αD(S/prime)|S/primeis aD-split on Xthat extendsA
BonXj−1/bracerightbig
=/summationtext/braceleftBig
αD(S/prime)|S/primeis aD-split on Xthat extendsA∪{xj}
BonXj/bracerightBig
+/summationtext/braceleftBig
αD(S/prime)|S/primeis aD-split on Xthat extendsA
B∪{xj}onXj/bracerightBig
≤αD/parenleftbigA∪{xj}
B/parenrightbig
+αD/parenleftbigA
B∪{xj}/parenrightbig
≤αD/parenleftbigA
B/parenrightbig
, (5.38)
where the ﬁrst inequality follows by induction and the second one by Lemma 5.9.9.
This completes the proof. /square
One consequence of this result is that a set of D-splits never provides an over-
estimation of the distance between two taxa xand y, that is, we have
/summationdisplay
S∈S(x,y)αD(S)≤d(x,y), (5.39)
summing over the set S(x,y)o fa l l D-splits that separate xand y.T os e et h i s ,
apply the theorem to the partial D-split{x}|{y}.
5.9.4 Computing the split decomposition
Suppose we are given a distance matrix DonX.A sw eh a v ee s t a b l i s h e di nt h e
previous section, the set of all D-splits on Xis weakly compatible and for any
pair of taxa x,ywe have that d(x,y) is greater or equal to the sum of weights of
allD-splits that separate xand y.T h es e to fa l l D-splits on Xis called the split
decomposition ofD. The following algorithm computes the split decomposition:
Algorithm 5.9.10 (Split decomposition) Given a distance matrix D on X=
{x1,..., xn}, compute the set of all weighted D-splits on Xas follows:

115 5.9 The split decomposition
abcde
a 02322
b 20233
c 32022
d 23202
e 23230{a}|{b,c,d,e}
{b}|{a,c,d,e}
{c}|{a,b,d,e}
{d}|{a,b,c,e}
{e}|{a,b,c,d}abcde
a 01211
b 10122
c 21011
d 12101
e 12120
(a) Distance matrix D (b) All D-splits (c) Split prime residue D0
Figure 5.15 The distance matrix DonX={a,b,c,d,e}shown in (a) admits only five D-splits, namely
the trivial splits listed in (b), each with an isolation index of 0.5. The remaining split prime
residue D0onXi ss h o w ni n( c ) .
Initially, set X1={x1}andS1=∅. Now, assume that we have computed the set
of all D-splits Sion the ﬁrst i taxa Xi={x1,..., xi}.T oo b t a i n Si+1onXi+1=
{x1,..., xi+1},f o re a c hs p l i tA
B∈Sido:
/squaresolidIfαD/parenleftbigA∪{xi+1}
B/parenrightbig
>0,t h e na d dA∪{xi+1}
BtoSi+1.
/squaresolidIfαD/parenleftbigA
B∪{xi+1}/parenrightbig
>0,t h e na d dA
B∪{xi+1}toSi+1.
/squaresolidIfαD/parenleftbigXi
{xi+1}/parenrightbig
>0,t h e na d dXi
{xi+1}toSi+1.
The result is given by Sn.
This algorithm works because extending a partial split to more taxa can onlymaintain or decrease its isolation index. The worst-case time requirement of thisalgorithm is O(n
6), because the number of iterations of the main loop is n,t h e
number of splits present in the i-th iteration is O(n2) (as we show below), and the
time required to compute the isolation index of a split in the main loop is O(n3).
In practice, the run-time of the algorithm is usually much better than this analysissuggests, since the number of non-trivial D-splits tends to drop quite rapidly as
the number of taxa increases.
We can also use this algorithm to efﬁciently compute all splits of the Buneman
tree, by simply replacing the isolation index α
Dby the Buneman index βD.
LetDbe a distance matrix on Xand let Sbe the set of all D-splits on X.W e
deﬁne the residue distance matrix D0as
d0(x,y)=d(x,y)−/summationdisplay
S∈S(x,y)αD(S)≥0, (5.40)
whereS(x,y) denotes the set of all splits that separate xand y,a su s u a l .
Exercise 5.9.11 (Residue is a metric) Assuming that D is a metric, show that the
residue matrix D 0is a metric.
Consider the distance matrix DonX={a,...,e }shown in Figure 5.15a. For this
example, the only splits on Xthat have a positive isolation index are the ﬁve trivial

116 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
splits shown in Figure 5.15b. In each case, the isolation index is 0 .5. Subtracting the
contribution of each of these D-splits, we obtain the split prime distance matrix
D0shown in Figure 5.15c.
Theorem 5.9.12 (Residue is split prime) If D 0is the residue of some distance matrix
D, then D 0does not admit any D 0-split. In this case D 0is called split prime .
In the following, for any split SonX,d e ﬁ n et h esplit metric δSonXasδS(x,y)=1,
ifSseparates taxa xand y, and 0, else. The proof of the theorem is based on the
following technical result:Lemma 5.9.13 (Elimination lemma) Let D be a distance matrix on X,l e tS
/prime=A/prime
B/prime
be a ﬁxed D-split on Xand let λbe any number with αD(S/prime)≥λ≥0.I fD/primeis a
distance matrix on Xdeﬁned as
d/prime(x,y)=d(x,y)−λδS/prime(x,y)≥0 (5.41)
for all taxa x and y in X,t h e nf o ra n ys p l i tA
BonXwe have
αD/prime/parenleftbiggA
B/parenrightbigg
=α
D/parenleftBig
A/prime
B/prime/parenrightBig
−λ, ifA
B=S/prime,and
αD/parenleftbigA
B/parenrightbig
, else.(5.42)
Proof Before proving the lemma, note that, since S/primeis a D-split on X,w eh a v e
thatαD(S/prime) is strictly positive. This implies that ˆαD/parenleftbig{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbig
≥αD(A/prime
B/prime)>0 for all
w,x∈A/primeand for all y,z∈B/prime. It follows that, for all w,x∈A/primeand for all y,z∈B/prime,
we have:
ˆαD/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
=1
2(max{d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)}
−d(w,x)−d(y,z))
=1
2(max{d(w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)}−d (w,x)−d(y,z)).
(5.43)
Moreover, we have that:
ˆαD/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
=1
2(max{d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)}
−d(w,x)−d(y,z))
≥αD(A/prime
B/prime)≥λ. (5.44)
It follows that, for all w,x∈A/prime, and for all y,z∈B/prime,w eh a v e :
max{d(w,z)+d(x,y)−2λ,d(w,y)+d(x,z)−2λ}≥d (w,x)+d(x,z).
(5.45)

117 5.9 The split decomposition
T o prove the lemma, we only need to show that, for any quadruple Q={w,x,y,z}
onX,w eh a v e :
ˆαD/prime/parenleftbigg{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbigg
=ˆα
D/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
−λ, ifS/prime|{w,x,y,z}={w,x}
{y,z},
ˆαD/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
, else.(5.46)
T o this end, we need to consider four different cases, based on how the quadruple
Q={w,x,y,z}is partitioned by the split S/prime.
First, consider the case that Qis completely contained in A/primeorB/prime.I nt h i s
caseδS/prime(x,y)=0a n dd/prime(x,y)=d(x,y) for all taxa xand yinQ.T h e nc l e a r l y
ˆαD/prime(ˆQ)=ˆαD(ˆQ) for all choices of quartet topologies ˆQonQ.
Second, it may be that three taxa are contained in one part of S/prime,a n dt h ef o u r t h
is contained in the other; without loss of generality, {w,x,y}⊆ A/primeand{z}⊆ B/prime,
say. Then we have:
ˆαD/prime/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
=1
2(max{d/prime(w,x)+d/prime(y,z),d/prime(w,y)+d/prime(x,z),d/prime(w,z)+d/prime(x,y)}
−d/prime(w,x)−d/prime(y,z))
=1
2(max{d(w,x)+d(y,z)−λ,d(w,y)+d(x,z)−λ,d(w,z)
+d(x,y)−λ}−d (w,x)−d(y,z)+λ)
=1
2(max{d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)}
−d(w,x)−d(y,z))
=ˆαD/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
.(5.47)
Third, if Qis partitioned equally by S/prime,a n di f S/prime|Q=ˆQ, then we can assume,
without loss of generality, that {x,w}⊆ A/primeand{y,z}⊆ B/prime.T h e n :
ˆαD/prime/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
=1
2(max{d/prime(w,x)+d/prime(y,z),d/prime(w,y)+d/prime(x,z),d/prime(w,z)+d/prime(x,y)}
−d/prime(w,x)−d/prime(y,z))
=1
2(max{d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)+d(x,z)−2λ,d(w,z)+d(x,y)
−2λ}−d (w,x)−d(y,z))
=1
2(max{d(w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)}− d(w,x)−d(y,z))−λ
=ˆαD/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
−λ.(5.48)
The third equivalence of this result follows from the fact that:
max{d(w,z)+d(x,y)−2λ,d(w,y)+d(x,z)−2λ}≥d (w,x)+d(y,z),
(5.49)
as demonstrated at the beginning of the proof.

118 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
Fourth, if Qis partitioned equally by S/prime,a n di f S/prime|Q/negationslash=ˆQ, then we can assume
without loss of generality that {x,y}⊆ A/primeand{w,z}⊆ B/prime.T h e n :
ˆαD/prime/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
=1
2(max{d/prime(w,x)+d/prime(y,z),d/prime(w,y)+d/prime(x,z),d/prime(w,z)+d/prime(x,y)}
−d/prime(w,x)−d/prime(y,z))
=1
2(max{d(w,x)+d(y,z)−2λ,d(w,y)+d(x,z)−2λ,d(w,z)
+d(x,y)}−d (w,x)−d(y,z)+2λ)
=1
2(max{d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)+d(x,y)}
−d(w,x)−d(y,z))
=ˆαD/parenleftBig
{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightBig
.(5.50)
The third equivalence of this result follows from the fact that:
max{d(w,x)+d(y,z)−2λ,d(w,y)+d(x,z)−2λ}≥ d(w,z)
+d(x,y)≥d(w,z)+d(x,y)−2λ, (5.51)
using Eq. (5.45). /square
Using this lemma, we can now prove Theorem 5.9.12:
Proof LetDbe a distance matrix on Xand let S={S1,..., Sk}be the set of all
D-splits on X.L e t D0be the residue of D,g i v e nb y
d0(x,y)=d(x,y)−/summationtext
S∈S(x,y)αD(S)
=d(x,y)−αD(S1)δS1(x,y)···−αD(Sk)δSk(x,y)(5.52)
for all taxa xand y.
By repeated application of Lemma 5.9.13, we can sequentially eliminate each
split Sk,Sk−1,..., S1from the distance matrix D, while not changing any of the
other D-splits, until ﬁnally we are left with D0, which admits no split and is thus
split prime. /square
Exercise 5.9.14 (Split prime) Verify that the distance matrix D 0shown in
Figure 5.15(c) is split-prime.
The relationship between the different concepts can be summarized as follows:Lemma 5.9.15 (Split decomposition) Let D be a distance matrix on Xand let S
be the set of all D-splits on X. The split decomposition of D is given by the unique
decomposition
d(x,y)=/summationdisplay
S∈S(x,y)αD(S)+d0(x,y) (5.53)
for all x ,y∈X, where D 0is the split prime residue of D.

119 5.9 The split decomposition
In applications, a distance matrix DonXis represented by the split network Nof
all its D-splits, computed as described in Chapter 7.I ft h er e s i d u e D0ofDis zero
for all x,y∈X,t h e n Distotally decomposable . In this case the split network N
provides an exact representation of D, as the length of a shortest path between any
two taxa xand yinNequals d(x,y).
T o measure how well the distances in N(or, more precisely, in the split decom-
position of D) represent the distances in D,w ed e ﬁ n et h e percent ﬁt as
ﬁt(N,D)=100×/summationtext
x,y∈X/summationtext
S∈S(x,y)αD(S)/summationtext
x,y∈Xd(x,y)≥0, (5.54)
making use of the fact that distances based on the D-splits never exceed the distances
given in D. In practice, a ﬁt of 80% or more is usually required for a split network
Nbased on split decomposition to be considered a reliable representation of a
distance matrix D.
For example, the split network Nassociated with the distance matrix Don
X={a,...,e }shown in Figure 5.15a is a star tree consisting of ﬁve edges, each
of length 0 .5, representing the ﬁve trivial splits listed in Figure 5.15b. This is a very
poor representation of the distance matrix D, as the distances contained in the split
prime residue D0shown in Figure 5.15c are quite large. In this case, the ﬁt is only
≈41.7%.
A main attraction of the split decomposition method is that the number of splits
that it can produce is larger than the number of splits produced by a tree-buildingmethod (such as the Buneman tree), while not being too large:Lemma 5.9.16 (Size of the split decomposition) Let D be a distance matrix on
X={x
1,..., xn}. The number of D-splits on Xis at mostn(n−1)
2.
Proof LetDbe a distance matrix on Xand let Sbe the set of D-splits on X.T o
start the proof, assume that/summationtext
S∈SλSδS(x,y)=0 for some choice of real numbers
λSand for all taxa x,y∈X. Partition the set of splits Sinto three classes, S+,S−
andS0, consisting of those splits Swhose assigned number λSis positive, negative
or zero, respectively. Consider the metrics deﬁned by the two sides of the followingequation:
/summationdisplay
S∈S+λSδS(x,y)=/summationdisplay
S∈S−−λ SδS(x,y). (5.55)
Because the split decomposition of a distance matrix is unique, we must haveS
+=S−and thus S+=S−=∅.T h i si m p l i e s S0=Sand therefore λS=0
for all S∈S. This shows that the set of all split metrics δS(S∈S) is linearly
independent. Because the dimension of the set of all n×ndistance matrices (that
is, symmetric matrices with zero diagonal) isn(n−1)
2,t h ec l a i mi sp r o v e n . /square

120 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
abcde
a 04542
b 40344
c 53035
d 44304
e 24540
(a) Distance matrix (b) Buneman tree (c) Split decomposition
Figure 5.16 (a) Distance matrix DonX={a,..., e}. (b) Buneman tree for D. (c) Split decomposition
forD.
When presented with an additive distance matrix, the split decomposition
method can be used to reconstruct the associated phylogenetic tree:Lemma 5.9.17 (Split decomposition on additive distances) Let D be a distance
matrix on X. Then D is additive if and only if the set of D-splits on Xis compatible
and the residue D
0of D is zero.
Exercise 5.9.18 (Proof) Prove the lemma.
The split decomposition method has been used in numerous publications to rep-resent distance matrices that show a signiﬁcant amount of non-tree-likeness, orin situations in which there is reason to believe that the best representation of thedata is not a phylogenetic tree. In practice, the method is limited to relatively smalldatasets of less than 100 taxa, or even much smaller, depending on the actual data.This is because the isolation index of a split Sis deﬁned as the minimum quartet
isolation index over all quartets that span Sand so, for a larger number of taxa,
or for more divergent taxa, it is quite likely that one of the quartets will have anisolation index of 0, thus preventing Sfrom being a D-split.
In Section 10.4 we discuss the neighbor-net method, an alternative method for
constructing a set of (not necessarily compatible) splits from a distance matrix,which does not suffer from this practical limitation.
Because the isolation index is a relaxation of the Buneman index, it follows that
the set of splits computed by the Buneman tree method is always a subset of theset of splits computed by the split decomposition method. In consequence, theBuneman tree can always be obtained from a split network that represents the splitdecomposition by contracting certain splits, as deﬁned in the next section.
In Figure 5.16, we display a distance matrix DonX={a,...,e }and show
both the Buneman tree and split decomposition network associated with D.I nt h i s
particular example, the distance matrix is not additive. Hence, the splits computedby the Buneman tree method do not provide a total decomposition of D. Indeed,
the ﬁt is only ≈6 4 % .H o w e v e r ,t h em a t r i x Dis totally decomposable by the split
decomposition method and so the ﬁt is 100% in this case.

121 5.10 Representing trees in a split network
(a) Split network N (b) Tree T (c)Tembedded in N
Figure 5.17 (a) A split network NonX={a,b,c,d,e,f}and (b) a tree TonX. In (c) the edges of
Nthat represent the splits from Tare highlighted. One sees clearly that contraction of the
other edges gives rise to the tree Tand thus that Ncontains T.
5.10 Representing trees in a split network
Suppose we are given a split network N=(V,E) that represents a set of splits S
onX. For a given split S∈S, we can obtain a new split network N/primeas follows: Let
ES⊆Ebe the set of edges representing SinN.F o re a c he d g e e=(v,w )i n ES
merge the source node vand the target node wand then delete e. We refer to this
o p e r a t i o na st h econtraction of the split S. It follows from the deﬁnition of a split
network that N/primeis a split network representing S−{S}. This implies the following
result:Lemma 5.10.1 (Tree contained in split network) IfS
/prime⊂Sis the split encoding of
some tree T on X, then a split network N representing Scontains T in the sense that
contracting all splits in S−S/primewill result in a network N/primethat equals T (in the sense
that it has the same labeled topology).S o ,i fw ea r eg i v e nas e to ft r e e s T={T
1,..., Tk}, for example, obtained by phy-
logenetic analysis of a set of kdifferent genes, we can represent all these trees in
one split network Ncomputed on the set of splits Sof all trees in T.T o“ s e e ”a
particular tree Tcontained in the network, one simply contracts all splits that are
not contained in the split encoding of T, as demonstrated in Figure 5.17.
Exercise 5.10.2 (Trees in split network) Determine a second tree contained in the
split network displayed in Figure 5.17. Construct a split network that contains at least
three different bifurcating trees on X={a,b,c,d,e,f}.
In practice, the idea of using a split network to represent multiple phylogenetictrees simultaneously needs reﬁnement, as the full collection of splits may lead to anetwork that is too large and complicated to be useful. Also, often the phylogenetictrees are on overlapping, but non-identical, taxon sets. These two issues lead to

122 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Split network N1 (b) Split network N2
Figure 5.18 Two split networks used in Exercise 5.11.2.
the concepts of consensus split networks and super networks, which we discuss inChapter 11.
5.11 Comparing split networks
In Section 6.14, we show that comparing two rooted phylogenetic networks is not
a straightforward problem and we discuss a number of different distance functionsthat have been proposed to address this task. The comparison of split networksis much simpler, because there is very close relationship between a set of splits S
onXand the split network Nthat represents those splits. T o compare two split
networks N
1and N2onX, we compare the corresponding set of splits S1andS2,
respectively, using the Robinson-Foulds distance [ 204]:
Deﬁnition 5.11.1 (Robinson-Foulds distance) The Robinson-Foulds distance
between two sets of splits S1andS2onXis based on their symmetric difference:
dRF(S1,S2)=|S1/triangleS 2|
2. (5.56)
Note that the Robinson-Foulds distance is a proper metric for canonical splitnetworks.Exercise 5.11.2 (Robinson-Foulds distance on split networks) Compute the
Robinson-Foulds distance for the two sets of splits represented by the two split networks
N
1and N 2depicted in Figure 5.18.
5.12 T-theory
In this section, we give a very brief introduction to T-theory , which is a mathematical
theory [63] that extends both the work on split decomposition [ 9] and earlier work
on ﬁnite metric spaces [137 ]. This is provided for the sake of completeness and the
material presented here is not used elsewhere in the book. T-theory is not for themathematically faint-hearted.
LetDbe a distance matrix on X={x
1,..., xn}. Throughout this section, we
assume that Dis a metric on X, in particular fulﬁlling the identity requirement of

123 5.12 T-theory
Deﬁnition 3.12.1,a n dw er e f e rt o( X,D)a saﬁnite metric space .A sw eh a v es e e n ,
ifDis additive, then we can represent ( X,D) by an unrooted phylogenetic tree T
in such a way that the distance d(x,y) between any two taxa xand yequals their
distance dT(x,y)i nt h et r e e .
From a mathematically more abstract point-of-view, we can interpret an
unrooted tree as a compact, simply connected, one-dimensional polytope, andthis leads to the following question posed in T-theory: If Disnotadditive, can we
characterize an appropriate low-dimensional compact polytope into which we canembed ( X,D)isometrically , that is, preserving all distances between elements of
X? This polytope can then serve as a mathematical generalization of a phylogenetic
tree.
Another motivation for the development of T-theory is the desire to give a direct
characterization of the phylogenetic tree Tassociated with an additive distance
matrix Dthat is not based, explicitly or implicitly, on a tree construction algorithm.
The key concept in T-theory is a construction called the tight span that provides
a (at most ⌊
n
2⌋-dimensional) compact polytope that contains a given ﬁnite metric
space. The main aim of T-theory is to investigate and understand the combinatorialstructure of the tight span.
LetDbe a distance function on X={x
1,..., xn}. We ﬁrst deﬁne an unbounded
n-dimensional polytope associated with ( X,D):
P(X,D)=v=v
1
...
vn∈
Rn|vi+vj≥d(xi,xj),i,j=1,...,n,
(5.57)
in particular with v
i≥0 for all i,w h i c hf o l l o w sf r o m vi+vi≥d(xi,xi)=0.
For two n-dimensional vectors uandvwe deﬁne u≤vto mean ui≤vifor all
i=1,..., n. We now come to the main deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 5.12.1 (Tight span) For a ﬁnite metric space (X,D)we deﬁne the tight
span T(X,D)as the (compact) polytope consisting of all minimal points in P (X,D),
given by:
T(X,D)=/braceleftbig
v∈P(X,D)|w∈P(X,D)andw≤vimplies w=v/bracerightbig
.
(5.58)
We shall consider the tight span T(X,D) together with the distance function
||v,w||∞=max{|vi−wi|:i=1,...,n } (5.59)
as a metric space.

124 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
(
) ()
Figure 5.19 For a metric space (X,D)on two points X={x1,x2}with d(x1,x2)=1, we indicate the
unbounded polytope P(X,D)in gray. The tight span T(X,D)consists of all points along
the segment from/parenleftbig10/parenrightbig
to/parenleftbig01/parenrightbig
.
Figure 5.20 The polyhedron P(X,D)for three taxa with pairwise unit distances is contained in the
positive quadrant of R3, as indicated here in gray. The tight span consists of the three line
segments highlighted in bold.
Let us study a simple example given by X={x1,x2}andd(x1,x2)=1. In this case
we have
P(X,D)=/braceleftbigg/parenleftbiggv1
v2/parenrightbigg
|v1≥0,v 2≥0,v 1+v2≥1/bracerightbigg
(5.60)
and
T(X,D)=/braceleftbigg/parenleftbiggv1
v2/parenrightbigg
|v1≥0,v 2≥0,v 1+v2=1/bracerightbigg
, (5.61)
as illustrated in Figure 5.19.
In Figure 5.20 we show P(X,D)a n d T(X,D) for a set of three taxa X=
{x1,x2,x3}with distances d(xi,xj)=1, if i/negationslash=j,a n d= 0, else.
Exercise 5.12.2 (Tight span for three elements) Construct P (X,D)and T (X,D)
for the metric (X,D)on three elements with d (x1,x2)=1,d (x1,x3)=2and
d(x2,x3)=3.

125 5.12 T-theory
In the following we brieﬂy present three fundamental results from T-theory thatshow the relevance of the tight span construction for phylogenetic trees andnetworks.Lemma 5.12.3 (Isometric embedding) Let(X,D)be a ﬁnite metric space on X=
{x
1,..., xn}. The Kuratowski map κ:X→Rn,d e ﬁ n e df o ra l lt a x ax tinXas
xt/mapsto→κ(xt)=d(x
1,xt)
...
d(xt,xt)
...
d(xn,xt), (5.62)
maps the metric space (X,D)isometrically into the tight span T (X,D).
Proof Consider κ(x
t) for an arbitrary taxon xt. We ﬁrst claim that κ(xt) lies in
P(X,D). T o see this, set
v=v
1
...
vn=d(x
1,xt)
...
d(xn,xt), (5.63)
and then for any pair of indices iand jwe have
v
i+vj=d(xi,xt)+d(xj,xt)≥d(xi,xj), (5.64)
b yt h et r i a n g l ei n e q u a l i t y ,s h o w i n gt h a tt h ec l a i mi sc o r r e c t .
Secondly, we claim that κ(xt)l i e si n T(X,D). T o prove this, consider an arbitrary
vector u=/parenleftBiggu1
...
un/parenrightBigg
with u≤vand u/negationslash=v. The latter two conditions imply that
there exists an index iwith ui<v i.F o ra n yo t h e ri n d e x j,w et h e nh a v eu i+uj<
vi+vj≤d(xi,xt)+d(xj,xt)≤d(xi,xj), by the triangle inequality. Thus, uis
not contained in P(X,D), implying that κ(xt) is a minimal element of P(X,D)
and thus lies in T(X,D).
Finally, we claim that the Kuratowski map preserves distances. T o see this,
consider two arbitrary elements xiand xjinX. For the distance between their
two images under the Kuratowski map we have
||κ(xi)−κ(xj)||∞=max
i|d(x
1,xi)−d(x1,xj)|
...
|d(xj,xi)−d(xj,xj)|
...
|d(xn,xi)−d(xn,xj)|=d(x
i,xj), (5.65)
by application of the triangle equality to every entry of the vector. /square

126 Splits and unrooted phylogenetic networks
Figure 5.21 The tight span T(X,D)of a distance matrix DonX={x1,..., x4}that is not additive.
The polytope consists of all points contained in the lines and in the gray area. The labels
x1,..., x4indicate the locations of taxa under the Kuratowski embedding.
Returning to the example illustrated in Figure 5.19,w eg e t
κ(x1)=/parenleftbiggd(x1,x1)
d(x2,x1)/parenrightbigg
=/parenleftbigg01/parenrightbigg
andκ(x
2)=/parenleftbiggd(x1,x2)
d(x2,x2)/parenrightbigg
=/parenleftbigg10/parenrightbigg
. (5.66)
For the next result, we ﬁrst need to establish a link between polytopes and trees.
LetPbe a compact n-dimensional polytope. We call Pan
R-tree ,i fi ti st h es e to f
all points contained in a graph-theoretical tree embedded in n-dimensional space.
We state the following without proof.Lemma 5.12.4 (Additivity and tight span) Let(X,D)be a ﬁnite metric space. The
distance matrix D is additive if and only if the tight span T (X,D)is an
R-tree.
In Figure 5.21 we show the tight-span of a metric on four taxa that is not additive.
Here is the third result, again stated without proof:Lemma 5.12.5 (Split decomposition and tight span) Let D be a distance matrix on
X. If D is totally decomposable then the canonical split network N representing the
split decomposition of D is contained in the 1-skeleton (set of 1-dimensional faces) of
T(X,D).
Chapter notes
The mathematical foundations for the split decomposition and split networkswere laid down in [ 9]. In particular, Sections 5.8and 5.9are based on that paper,
although we have attempted to simplify the treatment. Our description of theBuneman graph is based on [ 217], however, the concept of a projection is new.
The presented deﬁnition of a split network is from [ 62]. Our brief introduction to
T-theory is based on [ 63].

6
Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
The concept of a cluster plays a fundamental role in classiﬁcation: For a set oftaxaXwe may want to group some of the elements together in the form of a
cluster, for example, because they share an attribute that distinguishes them fromother elements. In the context of phylogenetic analysis, clusters should be clades ormonophyletic groups that reﬂect the evolutionary history of a set of taxa.
Any rooted phylogenetic tree represents a set of compatible clusters. In this
chapter, we study rooted phylogenetic networks that can be used to represent setsof incompatible clusters, as well. In phylogenetic analysis, incompatible sets ofclusters may occur due to reticulate evolutionary events, such as hybridization orhorizontal gene transfer, or they might reﬂect uncertainties due to insufﬁcient dataor inadequate analysis methods.
Ideally, a rooted phylogenetic network should explicitly explain the evolutionary
history of a set of taxa in terms of evolutionary events such as mutations, speciationsand reticulate events. Methods are beginning to emerge to address this challenge,but, as we shall see, practical methods for computing such networks have not yetbeen established.
In this chapter, we attempt to give a uniﬁed approach to rooted phylogenetic
networks, bringing together a number of different topics and issues that have so farbeen treated separately in the literature. This chapter contains some material thatis new and has not appeared in print before.
6.1 Overview
Figure 6.1shows the relationships between some of the main concepts introduced
in this chapter. The focus is on rooted phylogenetic networks . As a ﬁrst example, we
study cluster networks and then point out that any rooted phylogenetic network
can be interpreted in two different ways, namely either as a hardwired network or
as asoftwired network. Cluster networks and rooted phylogenetic trees are the two
127

128 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
Figure 6.1 Overview of the main concepts introduced in this chapter. From bottom to top, each link
represents a “can be interpreted as” relationship.
main examples of hardwired networks, and it is computationally easy to determinethese from a given set of clusters.
H o w e v e r ,w h e nr o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r k sa r ei n t e r p r e t e di nas o f t w i r e d
sense, then many of the basic computational problems, such as determining whethera given network represents some given cluster, become computationally hard tosolve, in general. Thus, a number of different deﬁnitions have been introduced inthe literature to provide topological constraints on the types of networks studied,with the aim of making the computational questions easier to solve.
The concepts of a galled tree, level-k network andgalled network all put constraints
o nh o wt a n g l e dt h ec y c l e si nar o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r km a yb e ,w h e r e a st h etree-child and visible reticulations properties aim at eliminating complicated patterns of
cycles that do not directly inﬂuence the data generated on the network. In the lastpart of this chapter, we discuss the problem of comparing two rooted phylogeneticnetworks.
6.2 Clusters, compatibility and incompatibility
Recall the deﬁnition of a cluster given in Section 1.6:
Deﬁnition 6.2.1 (Cluster) LetXb eas e to ft a x a .A cluster C is any non-empty
proper subset C of X. We explicitly exclude both the empty set ∅and the full set X
from this deﬁnition. A cluster C is called trivial , if it contains only one element. A
weighted cluster is a cluster C that has been assigned a weight ω(C)≥0.

129 6.2 Clusters, compatibility and incompatibility
Figure 6.2 A rooted phylogenetic tree whose edges are labeled by the clusters that they represent.
Throughout this book, we usually assume that any set of clusters mentioned con-tains all trivial clusters, unless otherwise stated.
LetCbe a set of clusters on X.W es a yt h a t Cseparates two taxa x,y∈Xif there
exists a cluster C∈Csuch that either xis contained in Coryis contained in C,
but not both. Because we usually assume that all trivial clusters are present, the setsof clusters considered usually separate all pairs of taxa in X.
LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let X
/prime⊂Xbe a subset of taxa. We deﬁne the
set of clusters induced byX/prime,o rt h erestriction ofCto the subset X/prime,a s
C|X/prime={C∩X/prime|C∈Cand C∩X/prime/negationslash=∅ }. (6.1)
Every edge eo far o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e TonXis said to represent the cluster
C⊂Xthat is deﬁned as the set of all taxa that label nodes that are descendants of
t h et a r g e tn o d eo fe . In the literature, alternative formulations of this concept are
to say that einduces the cluster Cor that e displays the cluster C. Equivalently, the
cluster represented by ecan be obtained as follows: Deletion of the edge efrom
Tproduces two connected components and the cluster Cis then given by the set
of all taxa that label leaves that are contained in the connected component thatdoes not contain the root ρ.F i g u r e 6.2s h o w sa ne x a m p l eo far o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i c
tree and the clusters represented by its edges. We use C(T)t od e n o t et h es e to fa l l
clusters represented by edges in T. If the edges of the tree have lengths or weights,
then these can be assigned to the corresponding clusters, as well.
Let us take a closer look at the relationships between different clusters in a
rooted phylogenetic tree. At the lowest level of the tree, the leaf edges representtrivial clusters. Going up the tree toward the root, larger clusters are formed as theunion of smaller clusters. Observe that if a cluster contains some other clusters assubsets, then the edges representing the subsets lie below the edge representing thesuperset. Also, note that for any two different clusters we have that either the two

130 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
edges representing them are in different subtrees, in which case the two clusters aredisjoint, or one edge lies above the other, in which case the one cluster contains theother. This latter observation leads to the following deﬁnition:Deﬁnition 6.2.2 (Compatibility and incompatibility) Two different clusters C
1and
C2onXare called compatible, if they are disjoint or if one contains the other, that is,
if C 1∩C2=∅,C1⊂C2or C 2⊂C1.As e to fc l u s t e r sC onXis called compatible,
if every pair of clusters in Cis compatible.
Compatible clusters are also sometimes called nested . Two clusters C1and C2on
Xthat are not compatible are called incompatible and, similarly, a set of clusters
in which all clusters are pairwise incompatible is called incompatible .C l e a r l y ,t w o
clusters C1and C2onXare incompatible if and only if we have C1∩C2/negationslash=∅,
C1−C2/negationslash=∅ and C2−C1/negationslash=∅.
As argued above, the set of clusters C(T) represented by a rooted phylogenetic
tree Tis always compatible. Vice versa, in Theorem 6.4.4, we will see that any set
of compatible clusters C(containing all trivial clusters) on Xcan be represented
by a rooted phylogenetic tree.Exercise 6.2.3 (Incompatible clusters not on a tree) Show that the set of clusters C=/braceleftbig
{a,b},{b,c},{a},{b},{c}/bracerightbig
is incompatible and prove that it cannot be represented
by a rooted phylogenetic tree.A main topic of this chapter is how to represent a set of incompatible clusters.T o this end, in Section 6.3, we ﬁrst introduce the Hasse diagram as a means of
representing set systems and then use it as a basis to develop the concept of a clusternetwork in Section 6.4.
Deﬁnition 6.2.4 (Incompatibility graph) Theincompatibility graph IG(C)of a set
of clusters Cis the graph (V,E)that has node set V =Cand edge set E =/braceleftbig
{C
1,C2}|
C1and C 2a r ei n c o m p a t i b l ec l u s t e r s/bracerightbig
.
A cluster C∈Cis compatible with all other clusters in Ci fa n do n l yi fi ti sa ni s o l a t e d
node in the incompatibility graph, see Figure 6.3. In consequence, a set of clusters
Cis compatible if and only if every connected component in the incompatibility
graph IG(C) has cardinality one.
As we will see later in the book, the incompatibility graph plays an important
role in the computation of rooted phylogenetic networks, because it can be used todecompose the computational problem into subproblems that correspond to thenon-trivial connected components of the incompatibility graph.Exercise 6.2.5 (Incompatibility graph) Design a set of clusters Cwhose incompati-
bility graph I G (C)is the same as the graph shown in Figure 6.4.

131 6.2 Clusters, compatibility and incompatibility
{a} {b} {c} {d}
{a,b}—{b,c}
{a,b,c}
Figure 6.3 For the set of clusters C=/braceleftbig
{a},{b},{c},{d},{a,b},{b,c},{a,b,c}/bracerightbig
, here we show the incom-
patibility graph IG(C). This graph has seven nodes and only one edge, which connects the
two nodes labeled {a,b}and{b,c}.
Figure 6.4 Graph used in Exercise 6.2.5.
The following result can be used to decompose a collection of clusters into two (ormore) mutually compatible sets of clusters. It is used in Section 8.2:
Lemma 6.2.6 (Decomposition lemma) LetCbe a set of two or more clusters on
X. Assume that there exists a cluster C on Xsuch that C=C|
C∪C|X−Cwith
C|C/negationslash=∅ andC|X−C/negationslash=∅ (if C/∈C), orC=C|C∪C|X−C∪{C}(if C∈C). Then,
the incompatibility graph I G (C)forChas at least two components.
Exercise 6.2.7 (Proof) Prove Lemma 6.2.6.
6.2.1 Optimal compatible subsets
LetCbe a set of clusters on X.I fC is incompatible, then there are two basic
computational problems that have been studied in the literature. Both aim atconstructing a set of compatible clusters from the given data and also providesome measure of incompatibility for C. The ﬁrst problem is to remove a minimum
number of clusters so that the remaining set of clusters is compatible:Problem 6.2.8 (Maximum Compatibility problem) Determine a maximum-size
subset of clusters C
/prime⊂Cthat is compatible.
Solving the Maximum Compatibility problem is equivalent to ﬁnding a maximumclique in a given graph, that is, ﬁnding a subgraph of maximum size in which
all pairs of nodes are connected. As the latter Max Clique problem is known
to be NP-hard [146 ], it follows that the Maximum Compatibility problem is,
too.

132 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
Exercise 6.2.9 (Proof of equivalence) Show that the Maximum Compatibility prob-
lem is equal to the Max Clique problem. (Hint: When constructing an instance of theMaximum Compatibility problem from a graph G that is an instance of the MaxClique problem, deﬁne one taxon per node of G and one taxon for every pair of twonodes that are not connected by an edge in G.)The second problem is to remove a minimum number of taxa so that the set ofclusters restricted to the remaining taxa is compatible:Problem 6.2.10 (Maximum Compatible Subset problem) Determine a maximum-
s i z es u b s e to ft a x a X
/prime⊂Xsuch that the set of clusters C |X/primeinduced on X/primeis compat-
ible.Unfortunately, this problem is also known to be NP-hard [ 227], which can be
shown by reduction of the three dimensional matching problem [ 146].
6.3 Hasse diagrams
Hasse diagrams are used in mathematics to visualize partial orders on ﬁnite sets.Deﬁnition 6.3.1 (Partial order) Apartial order is a binary relation “ /precedesequal”o nas e t C
that is reﬂexive ,transitive and antisymmetric , that is, for all u ,v,w ∈Cwe have:
(i)u/precedesequalu( r e ﬂ e x i v i t y ) .
(ii)If u/precedesequalvandv/precedesequalwthen u /precedesequalw(transitivity).
(iii) If u/precedesequalvandv/precedesequalut h e nu =v(antisymmetry).
An important example of a partial order is set inclusion ⊆. Any set of clusters Con
at a x o ns e t Xis partially ordered by set inclusion, and this is the partial order that
we are most interested in. A partially ordered set is given by a ﬁnite set Ctogether
with a partial order /precedesequal.
One simple way to represent a partially ordered set ( C,/precedesequal)i st od e ﬁ n ead i r e c t e d
graph G=(V,E) whose node set consists of all members, V=C,a n dw h o s e
edge set represents all relationships between members, E={(v,w )|v/precedesequalw}(see
Figure 6.5a). This graph will usually contain many edges that are redundant
because they can be inferred from the properties listed in Deﬁnition 6.3.1:F o r
each node vt h e r ew i l lb ea ne d g e( v,v) that can be removed without loss of
information, because reﬂexivity implies v/precedesequalv. Further, for any triangle of edges
{(v, u),(u,w),(v,w )}⊆ Eone can remove the edge ( v,w )f r o m Ebecause tran-
sitivity implies that v/precedesequalwmust hold. Finally, note that antisymmetry implies that
Gcontains no directed cycles and is thus a DAG. These considerations lead to the
following classic deﬁnition:

133 6.4 Cluster networks
(a) Full representation of a partial order (b) Hasse diagram
Figure 6.5 For C=/braceleftbig
{a,b,c,d},{a,b,c},{a,b},{c,d},{a},{b},{c},{d}/bracerightbig
, we show (a) the full represen-
tation of the partial ordered set (C,⊆)and (b) the Hasse diagram that represents (C,⊆).
Deﬁnition 6.3.2 (Hasse diagram) Let(C,/precedesequal)be a partially ordered set. The Hasse
diagram H=(V,E)that represents (C,/precedesequal)is a DAG that is deﬁned as follows:
(i)Set V=C.
(ii)For each pair of nodes v,w in V we deﬁne an edge e =(v,w )in E if and only if
v/precedenotslnteqlwand there exists no third node u in V with v/precedenotslnteqlu/precedenotslnteqlw.
It is customary to draw a Hasse diagram Hfrom bottom to top, for any edge ( v,w )
inHthe node wis placed higher than the node v, and to omit the arrowheads, see
Figure 6.6a.
Exercise 6.3.3 (Pseudo-code for Hasse diagram) Write an algorithm in pseudocode
that takes as input a system of clusters Cand produces as output the Hasse diagram
that represents (C,⊆).
6.4 Cluster networks
LetCbe a set of clusters on X. In the previous section, we saw that Ccan be
represented by a Hasse diagram in which each node is one of the clusters in C.
However, this type of representation is rarely used in phylogenetics because it doesnot provide a direct generalization of phylogenetic trees: in a rooted phylogenetictree, each cluster is usually associated with an edge, not a node. Also, the edges in aHasse diagram are directed in the wrong direction, from smaller clusters to largerclusters. These two minor difﬁculties are overcome in the deﬁnition of a clusternetwork (see Figure 6.6).

134 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Hasse diagram (b) Cluster network
Figure 6.6 (a) Hasse diagram Hand (b) cluster network Nfor the same set of clusters ConX=
{a,b,..., h}.E a c ht r e ee d g ei n Nrepresents exactly one cluster in C. For example, the edge
labeled zrepresents the cluster {c,d,e}.
Recall that a rooted DAG is a (weakly) connected, directed acyclic graph that has
precisely one node of indegree 0, called the root ofG.R e c a l la l s ot h a tan o d eo f
outdegree 0 is called a leaf. A node of indegree ≤1i sc a l l e datree node , whereas any
node of indegree ≥2i sc a l l e dareticulate node orreticulation .A ne d g e e=(v,w )
is called a tree edge , if its target node wis a tree node and, otherwise, it is called a
reticulate edge .
Given a rooted DAG G=(V,E), we use L(G)⊂Vto denote the set of leaves
inG, and for any node vinGwe use L(v) to denote the set of leaves that
are descendants of v. First we deﬁne a cluster network as a graph, without any
reference to clusters [ 121]:
Deﬁnition 6.4.1 (Cluster network) LetXbe a set of taxa. A cluster network
N=(G,λ)onXconsists of a rooted DAG G =(V,E),t o g e t h e rw i t hab i j e c t i v e
leaf-labeling λ:X→L(G)(see Figure 6.6b). For any pair of nodes vandwin G
we require the following properties:
(i)We have L (v)⊆L(w)if and only if vis a descendant of w.
(ii)We have L (v)=L(w)if and only if v=worvis a reticulate node and parent
ofwor vice versa.
(iii) Ifvis a child of w, then there exists no node u with L (v)/subsetnoteqlL(u)/subsetnoteqlL(w).
Additionally, we require that:(iv) Every reticulate node in G has exactly one out-edge, which is a tree edge.

135 6.4 Cluster networks
We refer to the proper ties ( i), (ii)a n d( iii)a st h e nestedness ,uniqueness andreduced-
ness condition, respectively. We refer to (iv )a st h ereticulation-separation property.
Every tree edge e=(v,w ) in a cluster network Ndeﬁnes a cluster γ(e)o nX,
namely the set of labels of all nodes in L(w). The set C(N) of all clusters obtainable
in this way is called the set of clusters represented byN.N o t et h a tw ed on o ta s s o c i a t e
a cluster with any reticulate edge. Two main properties of a cluster network canalso be formulated in terms of the two clusters γ(e)a n dγ(f) assigned to any pair
of tree edges eand f:
(i’)Nestedness: We have γ(e)⊆γ(f), if and only if elies below f,t h a ti s ,t h e r e
exists a directed path (possibly of length 0) from the target of fto the source
ofe.
(ii’) Uniqueness: Ifγ(e)=γ(f), then e=f.
Additionally, we have(iii’) Reducedness: If an edge elies below an edge fthen there does not exist an
edge gthat connects the source of fto the target of e.
We now discuss an algorithm, called the cluster-popping algorithm [121 ], which can
be used to efﬁciently compute a cluster network that represents a given set of clustersConX. The algorithm proceeds in three steps: it ﬁrst constructs (lines 3–13) the
Hasse diagram for C∪{X}(recall that the full set Xis not considered a member of
C), then inserts additional tree edges to ensure the reticulation-separation property
holds (lines 14–17), and then ﬁnally, it sets up the taxon labeling (lines 18–19).By construction, each node vof the original Hasse diagram (except the root)
corresponds to a cluster C∈Cand is the target of exactly one tree edge e, and so
this edge is used to represent C. The algorithm maintains a mapping νbetween
the set of clusters Cand the set of nodes in the network.
Algorithm 6.4.2 (Cluster-popping algorithm) LetCbe a set of clusters on a taxon
setX. To construct the cluster network N that represents C(and only C), do the
following:
1 for each cluster C ∈Ccreate a node u and deﬁne ν(C)=u.
Create a root node ρ
3 for each C∈Cin order of non-increasing cardinality do
Unmark all nodesPushρonto a stack S and mark ρ
while Si sn o te m p t y do
Popvoff S
Set isBelow =fa l se

136 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
for each childwofvdo
ifC⊂ν−1(w)then
Set isBelow =true
ifwis unmarked then Markwand push wonto S
ifisBelow =false then Create a new edge (v,ν (C))
14 for each nodevwith indegree ≥2and outdegree /negationslash=1do
Create a new node v/prime
Redirect all in-edges of vtov/prime
Create a new edge (v/prime,v)
18 for each taxon a ∈Xdo
Setλ(a)=ν−1({a})
end
Figure 6.7 illustrates the cluster-popping algorithm on a small example.
Throughout the execution of the algorithm, the map νprovides a bijection of
the clusters, together with the full taxon set X,o nt ot h es e to fn o d e so ft h en e t -
work. The local variable isBelow is set to true in the case that the current node v
has a child that will be placed “above” (that is, is an ancestor of) the node ν(C).
When processing a cluster, all nodes are initially unmarked; only unmarked nodesare pushed onto the stack, and then marked, so as to prevent any node from beingpushed onto the stack more than once.
Because computing the Hasse diagram is order independent and the remaining
part of the algorithm applies some modiﬁcations that are order independent, theﬁnal result is independent of the order in which Cis processed.
Assume that the number of taxa is nand the number of clusters is m.A se a c h
node is incident to some tree edge and there are mtree edges, the number of nodes
is at most 2m and the number of reticulate edges is at most/parenleftbig
2m
2/parenrightbig
. An upper bound
for the running time of the algorithm is given by O(nm3).
Exercise 6.4.3 (Cluster network from trees) Consider the two rooted phylogenetic
trees T 1and T 2depicted in Figure 6.8. Write down all the clusters represented in the
tree T 1and all the clusters represented in the tree T 2. Construct a cluster network that
represents the total set of clusters.Theorem 6.4.4 (Compatible clusters correspond to tree) A cluster network N
representing a set of clusters C(containing all trivial clusters) on Xis a rooted
phylogenetic tree if and only if Cis compatible.
Proof Assume that Cis compatible and that the associated cluster network N
contains a reticulate node r. By the properties of a cluster network, rhas exactly
one child u, which is a tree node and is associated with a cluster L(u)∈C.M o r e o v e r ,
rhas at least two parent nodes, vandw, say. By the reticulation-separation property,

137 6.4 Cluster networks
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
(g) (h) (i)
(j) (k)
Figure 6.7 For clusters C={{a,b,c},{c,d,e},{a,b},{c,d},{a},{b},{c},{d},{e}}onX={a,b,c,d,e},w e
illustrate how the cluster-popping algorithm constructs the associated cluster network N.
(a) We start with a single node representing the set of taxa X. We then process the set of
clusters Cin order of descending cardinality. In (b–j) we illustrate the result of processing
each cluster, respectively, emphasizing in bold the edges that are used by the algorithm.Dashed lines indicate new edges inserted to accommodate a cluster. The graph in (j) isthe Hasse diagram for C∪{X}. In (k) we show the resulting cluster network N, with each
non-trivial cluster labeling the edge that it is represented by.
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2
Figure 6.8 Two trees used as input for Exercise 6.4.3.

138 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
bothvandwmust be tree nodes, and so they both correspond to clusters L(v)∈C
and L(w)∈C, respectively. Now, we must have L(v)∩L(w)/negationslash=∅, because both
sets must contain L(u). By uniqueness, we cannot have L(v)=L(w). Moreover,
L(v)⊂L(w)a n d L(w)⊂L(v) are both impossible due to the nestedness and
reducedness properties of a cluster network. Hence, the two clusters L(v)a n d
L(w) are incompatible, contradicting the assumption that Cis compatible. Thus
the cluster network Ncannot contain a reticulate node and so Nmust be a tree,
by Lemma 1.4.3.
Now consider a set of clusters ConXthat contains two incompatible clusters
C1and C2,a n dl e t xbe a taxon that is contained in the non-empty intersection
C1∩C2. Any cluster network Nrepresenting Ccontains a leaf ulabeled by x
and also two distinct tree nodes vandwwith L(v)=C1and L(w)=C2,s a y .
By nestedness, the two nodes vandwcannot be connected by a directed path.
However, each is connected to uby a directed path. These two paths must both
enter some node ralong two different in-edges before they reach u, and thus N
contains a reticulate node, namely r. /square
Cluster networks provide a nice generalization of rooted phylogenetic trees: in acluster network, each cluster is represented by precisely one tree edge, whereasthe role of the additional reticulate edges is to facilitate the sharing of taxa that isrequired by incompatible clusters.
Cluster networks can be drawn either as cladograms, in which edge lengths have
no direct interpretation, or as phylograms, in which the tree edges are drawn to scaleto represent evolutionary distances. Both approaches are discussed in Chapter 13.
6.5 Rooted phylogenetic networks
Cluster networks are a ﬁrst example of a general class of networks that we call rooted
phylogenetic networks .
Deﬁnition 6.5.1 (Rooted phylogenetic network) LetXb eas e to ft a x a .A rooted
phylogenetic network N=(V,E,λ)onXconsists of a directed graph G =(V,E)
and a node labeling λ:X→Vs u c ht h a t :
(i)The graph G is a directed, acyclic graph (DAG).
(ii)The graph G is rooted, that is, it has precisely one node ρof indegree 0.
(iii) The node labeling λassigns a taxon to each leaf of G.
We usually assume that the network does not contain any node that is suppressible ,
in other words, any unlabeled node with indegree 1and outdegree 1. In addition we
usually assume that the taxon labeling λis a bijection between the taxon set Xand
the set of leaves of N.

139 6.5 Rooted phylogenetic networks
Figure 6.9 In this rooted phylogenetic network N, the leaves are labeled by taxa a,..., i,the root node
isρ, there are two reticulate nodes rand s, and all other nodes are tree nodes. The node v
is suppressible. All tree nodes except the node ware bifurcations. The reticulate node ris
a bicombination, whereas sis not.
Recall that Lemma 1.4.2 states that a rooted DAG is always connected. Here is a
summary of all the types of nodes and edges that we would like to distinguishamong (see Figure 6.9):
Deﬁnition 6.5.2 (Types of nodes and edges) Let N be a rooted phylogenetic network
on a taxon set X.
(i)T h eo n en o d ew i t hi n d e g r e e0i sc a l l e dt h er o o t .
(ii)An o d ew i t ho u t d e g r e e0i sc a l l e daleaf node .
(iii) A node with at most one in-edge is called a tree node .
(iv) Any edge leading to a tree node is called a tree edge .
(v)A node with at least two in-edges is called a reticulate node or a reticulation.
(vi) Any edge leading to a reticulate node is called a reticulate edge.
(vii) An unlabeled node with indegree 1and outdegree 1is called a suppressible
node . As deﬁned in Section 1.2,t o suppress such a node vwith in-edge (u,v)
and out-edge (v,w )means to delete vand then to create a new edge (u,w),i f
such an edge does not already exist.
Deﬁnition 6.5.1 is the most general deﬁnition of a rooted phylogenetic network N
that is given in this book. In analogy to the term X-tree mentioned in Chapter 3,w e
could also call NarootedX-network , as here we also allow taxa to appear as labels
of internal nodes and also allow nodes to be labeled by multiple taxa. However, wedo not use this general term.
The deﬁnition of a rooted phylogenetic network can be restricted in several
ways. For example in the context of biological processes such as speciation byhybridization, horizontal gene transfer or recombination, it is generally assumed

140 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
that only two species can be involved in any such event and so sometimes the setof possible indegrees of nodes is restricted to the values 0, 1 and 2, correspondingto the root, tree nodes and reticulations involving only two in-edges, respectively.However, this is not a mandatory requirement, as a higher indegree may alsoindicate uncertainty in the order of a set of multiple events, rather than the existenceof one event involving more than two lineages.
As in the case of phylogenetic trees, a tree node is called a bifurcation ,i fi th a s
outdegree 2, and a rooted phylogenetic network is called bifurcating,i fe v e r yt r e e
node has outdegree 2 and every reticulate node has outdegree 1 or 2. A reticulatenode is called a bicombination , if it has indegree two, and a rooted phylogenetic
network is called bicombining , if every reticulate node has indegree two. A node
w h o s ei n d e g r e ei sl a r g e rt h a nt w oi sc a l l e da multicombining node and if such nodes
are present, then we speak of a multicombining network . A rooted phylogenetic
network that is both bifurcating and bicombining and in which every reticulatenode has outdegree one is called resolved .
Exercise 6.5.3 (Rooted network as cluster network) After suppressing the node
vin the rooted phylogenetic network N shown in Figure 6.9,t h en e t w o r kc a nb e
interpreted as a cluster network. Determine the corresponding set of clusters. Thenetwork is not resolved, does there exist a resolved network that represents the same set ofclusters?LetNbe a rooted phylogenetic network on X.W es a yt h a tar o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i c
network N
/primeisembedded inN,i fN/primecan be obtained from Nby performing a series
of node deletions, edge deletions and node suppressions, as deﬁned in Section 1.2.
This is illustrated in Figure 6.10.
6.6 The lowest stable ancestor
In a rooted tree T,a n yt w on o d e s vandwhave a unique lowest common ancestor
(LCA) that is deﬁned as the lowest node lca(v,w )t h a ti sa na n c e s t o ro fb o t h v
andw. In a rooted phylogenetic network N, it can happen that two nodes do
not have a unique LCA. In this case, the LCA is deﬁned as the set of all lowest
nodes that are ancestors of both vandw. For example, in Figure 6.11b, the LCA of
nodes band cconsists of the two nodes pand q.B o t hi nt r e e sa n dn e t w o r k s ,t h e
L C Ao fas e to fm o r et h a nt w on o d e s{v 1,v2,v3,...}is deﬁned as lca(v1,lca(v2,
lca(v3,... ))).
The “lowest stable ancestor” (sometimes also called the “lowest single ancestor”)
is a related concept that plays a role in the context of rooted phylogenetic networks[121]:

141 6.6 The lowest stable ancestor
(a) Network N (b) Network N
(c) Deletions (d) Suppressions (e) Embedded network
Figure 6.10 In (a) and (b) we show two rooted phylogenetic networks Nand N/prime. (In this example, the
latter is a tree, for simplicity.) To demonstrate that N/primeis embedded in N, starting with N,
we first delete one node and one edge, as indicated by the two crosses in (c). We thensuppress five nodes of degree two as indicated by the five crosses in (d). The resultingnetwork shown in (e) is topologically the same as the desired network N
/prime.
(a) Tree T (b) Network N
Figure 6.11 (a) In this rooted phylogenetic tree T, the lowest common ancestor of the two nodes
labeled band cis the node u. (b) In this rooted phylogenetic network N, the two nodes
labeled band chave two lowest common ancestors, namely the nodes pand q. In contrast,
their lowest stable ancestor is uniquely defined; it is the node u. The lowest stable ancestor
of the reticulate node risu.

142 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
Deﬁnition 6.6.1 (Lowest stable ancestor) Let N be a rooted phylogenetic network
and consider any node vin N that is not the root. A stable ancestor ofvis any ancestor
ofvthat lies on all directed paths from the root to v. The lowest stable ancestor (LSA)
ofvis deﬁned as the lastnode lsa (v)that is contained on all paths from the root to v,
excluding v.
The concept of a lowest stable ancestor is not new. In the theory of ﬂow graphs, theLSA of a node vis called the immediate dominator ofv[164].
LetNbe a rooted phylogenetic network. By deﬁnition, the LSA of any node in N
is unique. For any tree node v, the LSA is simply the parent node of v.T h es i t u a t i o n
is more interesting for reticulate nodes. For example, consider the reticulate node r
contained in the rooted phylogenetic network depicted in Figure 6.11b. The lowest
stable ancestor of ris the node u.
The lowest stable ancestors of all reticulate nodes can be computed in time that
is quadratic in the number of edges in the network using the following approach[121]:Algorithm 6.6.2 (Computation of all LSAs) To compute the LSA of each individual
reticulate node of N, one can proceed in a single postorder traversal of the network: Foreach reticulate node vand every node win the network, keep track of which (reversed)
paths from vtoward the root go through w. If, at any point, a node u is encountered
such that the set of all paths through u equals the set of all paths currently in existenceforv, then the LSA of vhas been found; it equals u.
A modiﬁcation of this algorithm can be used to label every node uby the set of
descendants for which uis a stable ancestor.
LetNbe a rooted phylogenetic network on Xand consider a reticulate node r
inNwith lowest stable ancestor /lscript=lsa(r). We can interpret ras a descendant of
/lscriptfor which we have incompatible accounts of the evolutionary history between /lscript
and r. This leads to the following construction [121]:
Algorithm 6.6.3 (LSA tree) Let N be a rooted phylogenetic network. The LSA tree
T
lsa(N)associated with N is the rooted phylogenetic tree on Xthat is computed as
follows: For each reticulate node vin N, remove all in-edges of vand add a new in-edge
e=(lsa(v),v)from the LSA of vtov. Then repeatedly remove all unlabeled leaves
and all nodes that have both in- and outdegree one, until no further such removal ispossible. The result is a rooted phylogenetic tree T
lsa(N)called the LSA tree of N (see
Figure 6.12).
T o see that the resulting graph is indeed a rooted phylogenetic tree, simply notethat after application of the algorithm, all nodes (except the root of N)w i l lh a v e
indegree one and then apply Lemma 1.4.3.T h eL S At r e eo far o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i c
network plays an important role in algorithms used for drawing such networks, as

143 6.6 The lowest stable ancestor
(a) LSA nodes in a network (b) The LSA tree
Figure 6.12 (a) A rooted phylogenetic network Ncontaining two reticulations, rand s, that have different
lowest stable ancestors, lsa(r) and lsa(s). The node labeled ehas four stable ancestors,
namely the node labeled s, the node labeled lsa(s) and the two nodes above it. (b) The
LSA tree Tlsa(N)associated with N.
discussed in Chapter 13.I nS e c t i o n6.7, we look at other ways of obtaining trees
from a rooted phylogenetic network.
LetX/prime⊂Xbe a non-empty subset of taxa and Na rooted phylogenetic network
onX.L e t lsa(X/prime) denote the last node contained on all paths from the root of N
to any leaf labeled by a taxon in X/prime.T h en e t w o r kinduced byX/primeinNis deﬁned as
the unique network embedded in Nthat contains all nodes and edges that lie on
any directed path from the node lsa(X/prime) to any leaf labeled by a taxon in X/prime.
6.6.1 LSA consensus tree
LetTbe a collection of rooted phylogenetic trees on Xand let C(T)b et h es e to f
all clusters represented by any tree in T.W eo b t a i nt h e LSA consensus tree forT,
denoted by Tlsa(T), by ﬁrst constructing the cluster network N(C(T)) for the set
of all clusters C(T) and then returning the LSA tree Tlsa(N)o f N. More formally,
Tlsa(T)=Tlsa(N(C(T))). The LSA consensus tree Tlsa(T) is closely related to the
Adams consensus tree, which was introduced in Section 3.17,s e eF i g u r e3.27.
Lemma 6.6.4 (LSA and Adams consensus trees are compatible) LetTbe a collec-
tion of rooted phylogenetic trees on X. The LSA consensus tree T lsa(T)and Adams
consensus tree T adams (T)are compatible in the sense that they possess a common
reﬁnement, that is, there exists a rooted phylogenetic tree T on Xsuch that both
Tlsa(T)and T adams (T)can each be obtained from T by contracting some edges in T.
We leave the proof as a challenging exercise:Exercise 6.6.5 (Proof) Prove Lemma 6.6.4.
The LSA tree construction can also be used as a super-tree method ,c a l l e dt h e LSA
super-tree method, that takes as input a set of rooted phylogenetic trees Ton

144 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
Figure 6.13 Rooted phylogenetic network N1used in Exercise 6.7.2.
different taxa sets and produces as output a rooted phylogenetic tree Tlsa(T)o n
the union Xof all taxa sets of the input trees. This works because the input of the
cluster-popping algorithm can be any set of clusters.
6.7 Representing trees in rooted networks
LetT={T1,T2,..., Tm}be a collection of rooted phylogenetic trees on X.F o r
example, these might be the result of a multiple gene analysis or they might bedifferent estimations of a single gene-based phylogeny. In practice, such a collectionof trees is often combined into a consensus tree ¯Tthat is then interpreted as
representing the parts of the evolutionary history upon which the different treesagree.
An alternative idea is to use a rooted phylogenetic network Nto represent Tin
the following sense:Deﬁnition 6.7.1 (Rooted trees represented by a rooted network) Let N be a rooted
phylogenetic network on a taxon set X.W es a yt h a tar o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e eTo n
Xisrepresented by N, or that T is displayed by N, if T is embedded in N. We
useT(N)to denote the set of all rooted phylogenetic trees on Xthat are represented
by N.Exercise 6.7.2 (Networks and trees) Draw all rooted phylogenetic trees represented
by the rooted phylogenetic network N
1s h o w ni nF i g u r e 6.13. Then construct the cluster
network N 2associated with the clusters of the obtained trees. Are the two networks N 1
and N 2the same or different? Explain.
LetTbe a set of rooted phylogenetic trees on X. How can one compute a rooted
phylogenetic network Nthat represents T, that is, for which T⊆T(N) holds? Let
C(T) be the set of all clusters contained in any of the rooted trees in T. A ﬁrst simple
idea is to use the cluster-popping algorithm to compute the cluster network Nthat
represents C(T). This actually works quite well because of the following result:
Lemma 6.7.3 (Cluster network contains rooted trees) LetTbe a set of rooted
phylogenetic trees on Xand letCbe the set of clusters of T. The cluster network N for
Crepresents a reﬁnement of every tree in T.

145 6.7 Representing trees in rooted networks
The idea of the proof of this result is to show that each edge in a given tree Tmaps
onto a path in the cluster network Nand that two such paths can only intersect at
their end nodes. As the paths do not necessarily intersect, in general, the embeddingis that of a reﬁnement of T, rather than of Titself.
Proof In the following, let L
N(v) denote the set of taxa that label leaves below
an o d ev in a rooted phylogenetic network N. Consider any tree T∈Tand let
e=(v,w )b ea ne d g eo f T. By the nestedness property, there exist two nodes v/prime
andw/primeinNsuch that LN(v/prime)=LT(v),LN(w/prime)=LT(w)a n dv/primeis an ancestor of
w/prime.W ec h o o s eap a t h P(v/prime,w/prime)f r o m v/primetow/primeto represent TinN. We need to show
that different edges in Tcorrespond to disjoint paths in Nas then the claim follows
from the nestedness property of N.L e t f=(p,q) be a second edge in Twith path
P(p/prime,q/prime)i nN. Assume that some node zinP(p/prime,q/prime) is contained in the interior of
P(v/prime,w/prime). We cannot have z=p/primeorz=q/primebecause then we would have LT(v)⊂
LT(p)⊂LT(w)o r LT(v)⊂LT(q)⊂LT(w), respectively, contradicting the fact
that (v,w )i sa ne d g ei n T.S i m i l a r l y ,w ec a n n o th a v et h a t v/primeorw/primeis contained in
the interior of P(p/prime,q/prime). Assume that the two paths intersect on an interior node
z.T h e n L(w)∪L(q)⊂L(v)∩L(p) and so, by compatibility, we have L(p)⊂
L(v)o r L(v)⊂L(p). The former case implies L(w)⊂L(w)∪L(q)⊂L(p)⊂
L(v) and the latter implies L(q)⊂L(w)∪L(q)⊂L(v)⊂L(p), in both cases
contradicting the fact that (v,w )a n d( p,q)a r ee d g e si n T. /square
The following exercise emphasizes that the word “reﬁnement” cannot be omitted
in the formulation of the above lemma:Exercise 6.7.4 (Trees in cluster network) Determine two rooted phylogenetic trees T
and T
/prime(not necessarily bifurcating) such that the cluster network N for C(T)∪C(T/prime)
represents neither T nor T/prime.
So the cluster-popping algorithm provides a fast way of obtaining a rootedphylogenetic network that represents a set of rooted phylogenetic trees T,s e e
Figure 6.14a–c. However, in practice, the resulting network may sometimes be too
large and messy to be of real use. One way to address this problem, discussed inSection 11.4, is to only represent those clusters that occur in at least ppercent of
t h ei n p u tt r e e s ,w h e r e pis a user-deﬁned parameter. The resulting network will
then no longer represent all trees in their full resolution, as some of them will occuronly in a contracted form.
A second idea is to search for a rooted phylogenetic network Nthat represents
Tusing a minimum number of reticulations, nodes and edges. This is discussed
in Section 11.5 f o rt h ec a s eo ft w ot r e e s .

146 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2
(c) Hardwired representation N1 (d) Softwired representation N2
Figure 6.14 In (a) and (b) we show two rooted phylogenetic trees T1and T2. (c) A cluster network N1
that represents all clusters contained in T1and T2(in the hardwired sense). (d) A second
rooted phylogenetic network N2representing the same set of clusters in the softwired sense.
In this particular example, both input trees are also represented by both networks.
6.8 Hardwired and softwired clusters
In this section, we discuss the problem of deﬁning the set of clusters C(N) associated
with a given rooted phylogenetic network N.A sw ew i l ls e e ,t h i sc a nb ed o n ei n
two different ways and we propose to use the terms “hardwired" and “softwired”to distinguish between the two different approaches [ 131].
LetNb ear o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r ko n X.I fNis a cluster network as deﬁned
in Section 6.4,t h e ne a c ht r e ee d g ee inNrepresents precisely one cluster γ(e),
which is given by the set of all taxa that appear as labels of nodes below e,t h a ti s ,
all labels of nodes that are descendants of the target node of e, see Deﬁnition 6.4.1.
We use the term hardwired clusters to refer to the set of all clusters C
hard(N)t h a t
are obtainable from a rooted phylogenetic network Nis this way. An example is
shown in Figure 6.14c.
An alternative way to deﬁne the set of clusters represented by Nis to use the set
of all clusters obtainable from the set of trees T(N) represented by N.W er e f e r
to this as the set Csoft(N) of clusters represented by Nin the softwired sense, for
reasons that should now become apparent. T o obtain these clusters directly fromthe network N, one must treat the in-edges leading to each reticulation ras a set
of alternatives, one of which is “on” if and only if all others are “off” . A softwiredcluster Cis then obtained directly from the network by ﬁrst deciding for each
reticulation which reticulation edge is on and which is off and then collecting all

147 6.8 Hardwired and softwired clusters
taxa that are reachable below some ﬁxed tree edge ewithout using any reticulation
edge that is off. An example is shown in Figure 6.14d.
It is important to understand and to distinguish between these two different
ways of interpreting a rooted phylogenetic network and so we summarize themhere:Deﬁnition 6.8.1 (Hardwired and softwired intepretation) Let N be a rooted phy-
logenetic network on X.U n d e ra hardwired interpretation ,a n yt r e ee d g eei nN
represents precisely one cluster γ(e), namely the set of all taxa that label nodes that
are descendants of the target node of e. Under a softwired interpretation ,a n yt r e e
edge e in N represents as e tC(e)of one or more clusters. Each member of this set is
determined as follows: First, for each reticulation r , turn one in-edge onand all others
off. Then, for each such set of choices, a cluster belonging to C(e)is given by the set
of all taxa that label nodes that lie below e and can be reached without using anyr e t i c u l a t ee d g et h a ti soff .
T o understand the relationship between C
hard(N)a n dC soft(N), consider Figure 6.14.
I n( a )a n d( b )w es h o wt w od i f f e r e n tr o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e s T1andT2on the taxon
setX={a,b,c,d,e,f}. In (c) and (d) we show two different rooted phylogenetic
networks N1and N2that both represent or display the two trees T1and T2.N o w ,
note that all clusters that are represented by (or contained in )T1and T2are also
represented by (or contained in ) the cluster network N1in the hardwired sense.
However, network N2does not contain all such clusters in the hardwired sense, for
example, the cluster {a,b}is missing, because in this network, any edge that lies
above aand balso lies above c.
In the rooted phylogenetic network N2,t h et w oc l u s t e r s {a,b}and{a,b,c}are
both represented by the same edge e1and the two clusters {d,e}and{c,d,e}are
both represented by the same edge e2. This illustrates that a rooted phylogenetic
network that is interpreted in the softwired sense will usually require fewer edgesto represent a set of clusters than a hardwired one, because individual tree edgescan represent more than one cluster.Exercise 6.8.2 (Hardwired and softwired clusters) Let N be a rooted phylogenetic
network on X. Show that C
hard(N)⊆Csoft(N)holds.
Assume we are given a set of rooted phylogenetic trees TonX.I fNis a rooted
phylogenetic network that represents all trees in T,t h e n Nwill also represent all
clusters C(T)o ft h et r e e si nT in the softwired sense. However, Nwill not necessarily
represent those clusters C(T) in the hardwired sense, as the above example shows.
Exercise 6.8.3 (Clusters in networks) Consider Figure 6.14. Write down all hard-
wired clusters contained in the rooted phylogenetic network N 1and all softwired

148 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2 (c) Tree T3 (d) Network N
Figure 6.15 All clusters represented in the three rooted phylogenetic trees T1–T3shown in (a–c) are
all represented in the rooted phylogenetic network Nshown in (d) in the softwired sense.
However, Ndoes not contain all three trees, as T3is missing.
clusters contained in N 2. Verify that each of the two networks contains all clusters
represented by the two rooted phylogenetic trees T 1and T 2.
When a given rooted phylogenetic network Nis to be explicitly interpreted in the
hardwired or softwired sense, then we sometimes refer to it as a hardwired network
orsoftwired network , respectively. Cluster networks are deﬁned as hardwired net-
works. However, all other rooted phylogenetic networks are usually interpreted inthe softwired sense.
If we are given a set of trees TonX, then it is natural to ask whether a given
rooted phylogenetic network that represents all the clusters of the trees will alsoautomatically represent the trees themselves. We have already seen that this istrue for cluster networks, up to reﬁnement. However, it is not true in general. InFigure 6.15 we show three trees T
1,T2and T3, and a rooted phylogenetic network
Nthat represents all clusters of the three trees in the softwired sense. This network
represents trees T1and T2,b u tn o t T3.
Lemma 6.8.4 (Representing clusters and trees in softwired network) LetTbe a
s e to fr o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e so nX and let C(T)be the set of all clusters contained
in these trees. A rooted phylogenetic network N that represents C(T)in the softwired
sense does not necessarily contain all trees in T.
Proof Figure 6.15 shows an example of three rooted phylogenetic trees T1,T2
and T3a n dar o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r k Nsuch that Ncontains all the clus-
ters present in the three trees, but not all three trees. (Example by MagnusBordewich.)
/square
How many clusters does a rooted phylogenetic network represent? A hardwired
network represents one cluster per tree edge. The number of softwired clustersrepresented by a rooted phylogenetic network Nis exponential in the number of
reticulations contained in N, in the worst case. In slightly more detail, the number

149 6.9 Minimum rooted phylogenetic networks
is bounded from above by
/summationdisplay
eat r e ee d g e2sp(e ), (6.2)
where sp( e) is the number of reticulations that span e ,t h a ti s ,t h en u m b e ro f
reticulate nodes that lie below ebut can also be reached from the root of Nby
an alternative path that does not contain e. In other words, this is the number
of reticulate nodes for which the target node of eis an ancestor, but not a stable
ancestor.
For example, the tree edge labeled ein Figure 6.15 is spanned by both reticulations
of the network Na n ds ow eh a v e2sp(e )=22=4. This value is indeed attained,
as the edge erepresents the four softwired clusters {a,b},{a,b,p},{a,b,q}and
{a,b,p,q}. Two of these clusters, the ﬁrst and third, are also represented by another
edge in the network.Deﬁnition 6.8.5 (Representation of clusters) Assume that we are given a set of
clusters Cand a rooted phylogenetic network N, on X.W es a yt h a tN represents
Cin the hardwired sense ,o r softwired sense ,i fC⊆C
hard(N),o rC⊆Csoft(N),
respectively.
6.9 Minimum rooted phylogenetic networks
LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let Nbe some rooted phylogenetic network
that represents Cin the softwired sense. In a biological interpretation of N,t h e
reticulate nodes will ideally correspond to reticulate evolutionary events such asspeciation by hybridization, horizontal gene transfer, or recombination of closelyrelated sequences, depending on the context. If we assume that such evolutionaryevents occur only rarely, then this justiﬁes that we require that a rooted phylogeneticnetwork Nrepresenting Cshould contain as few reticulations as possible. More
formally, we pose the following computational problem:Problem 6.9.1 (Minimum Rooted Phylogenetic Network problem) For a given
set of clusters ConX, compute a bicombining rooted phylogenetic network N that
represents Cin the softwired sense and contains a minimum number of reticulate
nodes and then a minimum number of edges.There are two ways to extend this to multicombining networks. On the one hand,we can simply count all reticulate nodes, whether bicombining or multicombining.This is done, for example, in the computation of galled networks, as described inSection 8.4. On the other hand, we can modify the optimization goal so as to

150 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
minimize the value
r(N)=/summationdisplay
v(indeg(v )−1), (6.3)
where the sum is taken over all reticulate nodes vin the given rooted phylogenetic
network Nand indeg( v)i st h ei n d e g r e eo f v. If all reticulations are bicombining
then r(N) is simply the number of reticulations in N.O t h e r w i s e , r(N) counts the
number of reticulations that any bicombining reﬁnement of Nwould have. This
generalization of the problem is more widely used. Problem 6.9.1 is hard:
Theorem 6.9.2 (Minimum network is hard) LetCbe a set of clusters on X. The
problem of computing a bicombining rooted phylogenetic network N that represents C
in the softwired sense and contains a minimum number of reticulate nodes is NP-hard.Proof The following result is shown in [ 135]: Let T
1and T2be two bifurcating,
rooted phylogenetic trees on X. The minimum number of reticulations used in
any rooted phylogenetic network that represents both T1and T2is equal to the
minimum number of reticulations used by any softwired network that representsall clusters of the two trees. The following result is shown in [ 27,241]: Let T
1and T2
be two bifurcating, rooted phylogenetic trees on X. The problem of determining the
minimum number of reticulations contained in any rooted phylogenetic networkthat represents both T
1and T2is NP-hard, see also Section 11.5. T ogether, these
two results imply the theorem. /square
In Section 6.10 we argue that an unconstrained minimization of the number
of reticulations in a network does not make sense, as this may lead to completelyunrelated parts of the network being brought together so as to save reticulations.This leads to the concept of decomposability. Then, in Section 6.11 we discuss one
approach to making the problem computationally simpler that operates by impos-ing topological constraints on the networks that are taken under consideration.Exercise 6.9.3 (Cluster network is minimum?) Is it true that a cluster network N
minimizes the number of reticulate nodes used to represent a given set of clusters Con
Xin the hardwired sense? Does it also minimize the number of edges used?
6.10 Decomposability
LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let Nbe a rooted phylogenetic network that
represents C, either in the hardwired or softwired sense. There is a close relationship
between the non-trivial connected components of the incompatibility graph IG(C)
and the non-trivial biconnected components of N.F o re x a m p l e ,i nF i g u r e 6.16 we
list a set Cof 13 clusters on X={a,..., f}whose incompatibility graph has two
non-trivial connected components. This is accompanied by a hardwired network N

151 6.10 Decomposability
Figure 6.16 For the set of clusters Clisted in (a) we show the incompatibility graph IG(C)in
(b). This graph has two non-trivial connected components, one containing four clus-tersC
/prime={ { a,b,c,d,e},{d,e,f},{e,f},{d,e}}and the other containing two clusters C/prime/prime=
{{a,b},{b,c}}. In (c) we show a rooted phylogenetic network Nthat represents the set of
clusters Cin the hardwired sense. This network has two non-trivial biconnected compo-
nents, the larger containing those edges that represent the three clusters in C/primeand the
smaller one containing those edges that represent the two clusters in C/prime/prime.
forCthat has two corresponding non-trivial biconnected components. As we will
see, it is desirable to enforce a one-to-one correspondence between the two typesof components and this can be achieved using an appropriate divide-and-conquerstrategy.
Let Nbe a softwired network on Xand assume that Cis a cluster that is
represented by some tree edge einN. There may be more than one such edge that
represents C. In particular, if the target node of ehas exactly two out-edges fandg,
where fis a tree edge and gis a reticulate edge, then any cluster that is represented
bye, with the reticulate edge gturned off, can also be represented by f.
For simplicity, throughout this book we assume that for any rooted phylogenetic
network Nrepresenting a set of clusters ConXthere is an edge assignment map
αthat chooses one suitable tree edge α(C) for each cluster in C.H o w e v e r ,t h i s
map is usually not mentioned explicitly. The main requirement that we place on
this map is that α(C) is contained in as small a number of reticulation cycles as
possible. As an example, consider the network depicted in Figure 6.16c. There the
edge assignment map chooses the leaf edge leading to the leaf labeled ato represent
the trivial cluster {a}rather than the predecessor of that edge.
Deﬁnition 6.10.1 (Decomposable network) LetCbe a set of clusters on X.A
phylogenetic network N that represents Cis said to have the decomposition property ,
or to be decomposable with respect to C, if there exists an edge assignment αsuch
that for any two clusters C
1,C2∈Cthe following holds: The two tree edges α(C1)and
α(C2)that represent C 1and C 2are contained in the same biconnected component of
N if and only if C 1and C 2lie in the same connected component of the incompatibility
graph I G (C).

152 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
The concept of a decomposable phylogenetic network was introduced in [ 96]a n d
[127], where similar proprieties are deﬁned for a phylogenetic network that isobtained from a set of sequences or splits, respectively.
In Figure 6.17 of Section 6.10.2 we present an example of a decomposable
network and of a non-decomposable one. The following result states that onedirection of the condition in this deﬁnition is always fulﬁlled:Lemma 6.10.2 (Incompatible clusters in biconnected components) LetCbe a set
of clusters on Xand let N be a rooted phylogenetic network that represents C(either
in the hardwired or softwired sense). If C
1and C 2are two different clusters contained
in the same connected component of the incompatibility graph I G (C)then the two
tree edges e 1and e 2that represent C 1and C 2are contained in the same biconnected
component of N.Proof LetNbe a rooted phylogenetic network representing a set of clusters C
onX.L e t e
1and e2be two tree edges in Nthat represent two clusters C1and
C2. By transitivity, it sufﬁces to show that e1and e2must be contained in the
same biconnected component of NifC1and C2are incompatible. For the sake of
contradiction, let us assume that C1and C2are incompatible and that e1and e2
are not contained in the same biconnected component of N. Then there must exist
either a cut edge hor at least a cut node vthat separates e1and e2. In the latter case
the cut node vmust be an unresolved node of degree ≥4 and in this case we can
introduce a new edge hthat is a cut edge between e1and e2. In either case, the edge
h=(v,w ) separates all leaves below wfrom all other leaves. This implies that any
cluster that is represented by an edge that does not lie below wmust be compatible
with every cluster that is represented by an edge below w. Therefore C1and C2
must be compatible, a contradiction. /square
6.10.1 Decomposability of hardwired networks
In this section we show that cluster networks are decomposable. However, if wemore generally consider the class of allhardwired networks, then decomposability
does not hold because one can add superﬂuous edges to such a network so as tomerge some of its non-trivial biconnected components.Lemma 6.10.3 (Cluster networks are decomposable) LetCbe a set of clusters on
Xand let N be a cluster network that represents Cin the hardwired sense. Then N is
decomposable.Proof Consider two clusters C
1and C2that are contained in the same connected
component of the incompatibility graph IG(C). Then the two edges e1and e2
representing them are contained in the same biconnected component of Nby
Lemma 6.10.2.

153 6.10 Decomposability
Now, consider two clusters C1and C2that are represented by two edges e1and
e2that are contained in the same biconnected component of N.T h e n ,b yt h e
properties of a biconnected component, there exists an undirected cycle in Nthat
contains both e1and e2. We must show that C1and C2are contained in the same
connected component of IG(C).
For the purpose of this proof, we deﬁne a reticulation cycle Z to consist of
two disjoint directed paths P1and P2,c a l l e dt h earms of the cycle, from one
node p(the apex of the cycle) to a reticulate node r/negationslash=p(the reticulation of
the cycle). At least one of the arms, say P1, must contain more than one edge,
because otherwise rand pwould be directly connected by two edges, which we
do not allow. Moreover, P2must contain more than one edge, too. Indeed, by the
reticulation-separation property pandvcannot be reticulate nodes, where vis
t h ep a r e n tn o d eo f rbelonging to P1. This implies that, for each node vinP1,
we have L(r)/subsetnoteqlL(v)/subsetnoteqlL(p). But this contradicts the reducedness property. So
P2must contain more than one edge. Finally, the reticulation-separation property
also implies that both arms must contain at least one tree edge.
First, let us assume that e1and e2are incomparable, that is, that e1is not below
e2and e2is not below e1.T h e n e1and e2are contained in different arms of a
reticulation cycle Z,s a ye 1inP1and e2inP2. Then the two clusters C1and C2
must have some taxa in common, namely those that lie below node r.B yt h e
nestedness property, C1must contain additional taxa not contained in C2,a n dv i c e
versa. But then C1and C2are incompatible and are thus contained in the same
connected component of IG(C).
Second, assume that e1and e2are comparable and contained in the same arm of
a reticulation cycle Z. Adapting the previous argument, C1andC2are incompatible
with every cluster represented by a tree edge in the other arm of Z. This implies
that C1and C2are contained in the same connected component of IG(C).
Third, assume that e1and e2are comparable, with C1⊂C2,s a y ,a n da r en o t
contained in the same arm of Z.L e te/prime
1b et h el o w e s tt r e ee d g ei nt h ea r m P1
containing e1such that the associated cluster C/prime
1is not comparable with C2,w h i c h
always exists. Then C/prime
1and C2are incompatible by the ﬁrst case and C/prime
1and C1are
incompatible by the second case.
Finally, assume that e1and e2are contained in some undirected cycle in N,b u t
in two different reticulation cycles. A simple induction shows that there must exista series of reticulation cycles Z
1,..., ZtinNsuch that e1is contained in Z1,e2
is contained in Ztand for any i=1,..., t−1 we have that the two reticulation
cycles Ziand Zi+1share some tree edge fi.A sw eh a v es e e n ,a n yp a i ro ft r e ee d g e s
fiand fi+1contained in the same reticulation cycle represent two incompatible
clusters, which are contained in the same connected component of IG(C). Hence,
the two clusters C1and C2represented by e1and e2must be contained in the same
connected component of IG(C), too. /square

154 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
6.10.2 Decomposability of softwired networks
By deﬁnition, the softwired interpretation of a rooted phylogenetic network doesnot forbid the presence of superﬂuous reticulate edges and this fact is easily used toconstruct an example of a softwired network that does not have the decompositionproperty.
However, even if we restrict our attention to “minimum” softwired networks,
then the decomposition property still does not necessarily hold [ 97,131]. Here, by
minimum we mean that each tree edge represents at least one cluster in Cthat is not
represented by any other tree edge, and the network is bicombining and containsa minimum number of reticulate nodes over all such networks.
T o see this, consider the softwired network Ndepicted in Figure 6.17a. It has
o n er e t i c u l a t en o d e rand represents the set of clusters Clisted in Figure 6.17b.
This network is minimum in the sense mentioned above. Now add the cluster
A={a,b,c,d}listed in Figure 6.17ct o Cto obtain a new set of clusters C
1.D o e s
Nrepresent C1as well? The only edge in Nthat could possibly represent Ais
the edge e, as it is the only edge that lies above all the nodes labeled a,b,cand
d.B u t edoes not represent Asince every cluster represented by econtains h.A
simple modiﬁcation N1ofNto accommodate the cluster Acan be obtained by
adding a new reticulation edge ufrom the source of eto a new node placed in
the middle of the reticulation edge q, as shown in Figure 6.17d. Then, to represent
the cluster Aby the edge eonN1,w et u r no nt h ee d g e s uand qtoavoid the
taxon h, that is, to set things up such that every directed path from the edge e
to the leaf with label hcontains some reticulate edge that is off. This modiﬁed
network represents C1=C∪/braceleftbig
{a,b,c,d}/bracerightbig
in the softwired sense and contains two
bicombining reticulations.Exercise 6.10.4 Verify that it is not possible to represent C
1using only one bicom-
bining reticulation.We now make a new network consisting of two copies of N
1,c a l l e d N1and N2,
with taxon sets X1={a,b,c,d,o,h}andX2={a/prime,b/prime,c/prime,d/prime,o/prime,h/prime}, and clus-
ter sets C1andC2(analogous to C1), respectively. This new network N∗on
X∗=X1∪X2will represent the set of clusters C∗=C1∪/braceleftbig
{a,b,c,d,o,h}/bracerightbig
∪
C2∪/braceleftbig
{a/prime,b/prime,c/prime,d/prime,o/prime,h/prime}/bracerightbig
.T h en e t w o r ki sd e p i c t e di nF i g u r e 6.17e. It has four
bicombining reticulations and is decomposable.
The edges uandu/primeare used (only) to avoid the taxa handh/prime, respectively. But we
can also achieve this goal using one less reticulation, as shown in Figure 6.17f. Here,
we turn on edges u/primeand qto avoid hwhen representing {a,b,c,d}on the edge e
and we turn on edges uand q/primewhen representing {a/prime,b/prime,c/prime,d/prime}on the edge e/prime.
The network N∗does not have the decomposition property because it has only
one non-trivial biconnected component, while the incompatibility graph for C∗

155 6.10 Decomposability
{a}, {b}, {c}, {d},
{o}, {h},
{a,b}, {a,b,h},
{c,d}, {c,d,h},
{a,b,c,d,h}
(b)
{a,b,c,d}
(a) Network for (b) (c) (d)Network for (b) and (c)
(e) Decomposable network (f ) Non-decomposable network
Figure 6.17 (a) A rooted phylogenetic network that represents all clusters listed in (b) in the softwired
sense. Note that this network does not represent the cluster {a,b,c,d}listed in (c). (d) A
minimum rooted phylogenetic network that represents all clusters listed in (b) and also theone listed in (c). The edge uis required to avoid hwhen representing the cluster {a,b,c,d}
on the edge e. The network shown in (e) contains two copies of the one shown in (a),
using a total of four reticulate nodes. It represents all clusters contained in (b) and (c), anda second set of corresponding ones on the taxon set {o
/prime,a/prime,b/prime,c/prime,d/prime,h/prime}. It is decomposable
on the union of these two sets of clusters. The network shown in (f) also represents alldescribed clusters, while using only three reticulations. However, this improvement is gainedat an undesirable price: decomposability is abandoned and two completely unrelated partsof the phylogeny are linked together via reticulation edges.
has two connected components coming from C1andC2. This example implies the
following result:Theorem 6.10.5 (Minimum softwired networks not decomposable) Softwired
networks are not necessarily decomposable, even when restricted to networks containinga minimum number of reticulations and containing no superﬂuous edges.Decomposing the problem of computing a minimum network is an attractiveapproach. However, this theorem states that solutions based on a decomposition of

156 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
the problem may not necessarily be optimal. On the other hand, non-decomposablesolutions can be very misleading: in the example above, two completely unrelatedparts of a dataset (these could be, for example, alpha-proteobacteria and bats) arebrought together just to save one reticulation. Hence, we suggest that decompos-ability should always be required of a solution.
As we have just argued, decomposability is a desirable property to have. In
Section 8.2we present a divide-and-conquer strategy that is used by some of the
algorithms described later in the book, and show that networks computed usingthis strategy always have the decomposition property.
6.11 Topological constraints on rooted networks
Given a set of clusters ConX, the problem of computing a rooted phylogenetic
network Nthat represents Cin the softwired sense and has a minimum number
of reticulations is a computationally hard problem, as mentioned above. One wayto address this issue is to consider topologically constrained classes of networks. Inthis section, we ﬁrst introduce the simplest class of non-tree networks, galled trees
and then look at two different generalizations of this class.
6.11.1 Galled trees
A rooted phylogenetic network Nthat does not have any non-trivial biconnected
components cannot contain any undirected cycles and must therefore be a rootedphylogenetic tree. Now, assume that Nhas one or more non-trivial biconnected
components. Because Nis a DAG, each such biconnected component must contain
at least one reticulation. We say that a reticulation risproperly contained in a non-
trivial biconnected component HofN, if all reticulation edges leading to rare
contained in H.
The topologically simplest type of rooted phylogenetic network that is not a tree,
is given by the following deﬁnition (see Figure 6.18):
Deﬁnition 6.11.1 (Galled tree) A rooted phylogenetic network N is called a galled
tree, if every non-trivial biconnected component of N properly contains exactly one
reticulation. Galled trees are sometimes assumed to be bicombining.In the original deﬁnition of a galled tree [ 98,241], undirected cycles were addition-
ally required to be node-disjoint and a gall was deﬁned as a biconnected componentthat contains exactly one reticulation [ 98,99,241]. However, none of the existing
algorithms for computing galled trees use this additional assumption and so requir-ing only edge-disjointness seems more natural. We deﬁne a gall as a biconnected

157 6.11 Topological constraints on rooted networks
(a) Galled tree (b) Not a galled tree
Figure 6.18 (a) A galled tree on the taxa X={a,..., h}. (b) Addition of a new taxon idestroys the
galled tree property, as the two reticulations rand sare not independent.
component of a rooted phylogenetic network that properly contains exactly onereticulation.
While the condition that a galled tree must be bicombining is appropriate
in the context of recombination networks, see Section 9.9,i tc a nb ed r o p p e d
when constructing rooted phylogenetic networks from clusters, as discussed inSection 8.3.
Exercise 6.11.2 (Galled tree for clusters) Given a set of clusters C,d o e st h e r ea l w a y s
exist a galled tree N that represents Cin the softwired sense? To answer this, consider
the following set of clusters
C=/braceleftbig
{a,b},{b,c},{c,d},{a,d}/bracerightbig
(6.4)
onX={a,b,c,d}. By inspection of all possible galled trees on X, show that the set
of clusters Ccannot be represented by a galled tree.
LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let Nbe a galled tree that represents C.W es a y
that Nis aminimum galled tree , if it minimizes the following three quantities (in
this order of priority):
(i) the number of reticulate nodes,
(ii) the number of clusters represented by edges contained in reticulate cycles, and
(iii) the number of edges in the network.We have the following result:Lemma 6.11.3 (Minimum galled trees are decomposable) LetCbe a set of clusters
onXand let N be a minimum galled tree that represents Cin the softwired sense (if
one exists), then N is decomposable.Proof LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let Nbe a minimum galled tree that
represents C.L e t rbe any reticulate node in Nand let Zdenote a reticulation cycle

158 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
associated with r. We show that any two clusters represented by tree edges in Zare
contained in the same connected component of the incompatibility graph IG(C).
As in the proof of Lemma 6.10.3,l e t P1and P2denote the two arms of Z.L e t
h1=(p,r)a n d h2=(q,r) denote the two reticulate edges at the bottom of the
two arms. By the deﬁnition of a galled tree, all edges in the two arms, except thetwo reticulate edges h
1and h2, must be tree edges. As in that proof, we argue that at
least one of the arms, say P1, must contain more than one edge and let e=(a,p)
d e n o t et h el o w e s tt r e ee d g ei n P1.L e t Adenote the set of all taxa whose labels can
be reached from pwithout going through r. Similarly, let Rdenote the set of taxa
whose labels can be reached from r.
IfP2consists only of h2, then the node qlies above ain the path P1.N o t et h a t q
is connected to aby a path of tree edges in P1,a n dl e t fb et h eﬁ r s tt r e ee d g eo nt h a t
path. We can assume that frepresents some cluster A∪B,w h e r e Bis disjoint from
R, because otherwise the edge h2could attach below f, by minimality. Similarly,
we can assume that the edge emust represent the cluster A∪R, because otherwise
the edge h1could attach above e. Now, every cluster represented by an edge in P1
below fand above ewill either contain A,as u b s e to f Band nothing from R,
and thus will be incompatible with A∪R, or will contain Aand Rand a subset
ofB, and then will be incompatible with A∪B. Because A∪Band A∪Rare
incompatible, it follows that all the clusters represented by tree edges in Zlie in the
same component of the incompatibility graph.
Now, consider the case in which P2contains at least one tree edge and let
f=(b,q) denote the lowest tree edge in P2.L e t Bdenote the set of taxa that can
be reached from qwithout going through r.
Every cluster represented by a tree edge in P1must be of the form A∪R,
A∪R∪D,A∪DorA.H e r e , Dis a set of additional taxa whose labels can be
reached from a node in P1without going through r. The ﬁrst and last clusters come
from the edge e, while the others come from tree edges higher up in P1.
In the ﬁrst case and second case, the clusters are incompatible with the cluster
B∪R. In the third case, the cluster is incompatible with A∪R. The fourth case
cannot occur due to minimality, because the cluster Acan be represented outside
of the cycle by a tree edge located above the subtree containing the nodes withlabels in A.
Applying the same argument to the arm P
2, we obtain that every cluster repre-
sented by a tree edge in Zis either incompatible with A∪Ror with B∪R.F i n a l l y ,
note that both A∪Rand B∪Rmust be present in C(or the corresponding edges
would be superﬂuous, contradicting minimality). As A∪Rand B∪Rare incom-
patible with each other, we have that any two clusters represented by tree edges in
Zare contained in the same connected component of the incompatibility graph
IG(C). /square

159 6.11 Topological constraints on rooted networks
In Section 8.3we show how to determine whether a given set of clusters ConX
can be represented by a galled tree and we describe an algorithm for constructinga galled tree for a given set of clusters that takes advantage of the decompositionproperty. In Section 11.6, the same algorithm is used to compute a galled tree that
represents two given rooted phylogenetic tree, T
1and T2onX, if one exists, based
on the following result:Lemma 6.11.4 (Galled tree contains both trees) Let T
1and T 2be two rooted (not
necessarily bifurcating) phylogenetic trees on Xand letC=C(T1)∪C(T2)be the set
of all clusters represented by the two trees. If there exists a rooted phylogenetic network
No nXthat is a galled tree that represents Cand has the reticulation-separation
property, then N contains both trees T 1and T 2, if the two trees are bifurcating, or
reﬁnements of them, otherwise.Proof Let us assume that neither T
1nor a reﬁnement of T1is contained in a galled
tree Ncomputed for C. This implies that there exist two disjoint (and non-empty)
sets of taxa Cand Dsuch that the clusters Cand C∪Dare represented in T1,b u t
the edge e=(ve,w e) representing CinNdoes not lie below the edge f=(vf,w f)
representing C∪DinN.L e t L(C)a n d L(D) denote the set of all leaves in Nthat
are labeled by taxa in Cand D, respectively. We show that, if the edge representing
Cdoes not lie below the edge representing C∪DinN, then this can easily be
ﬁxed by adjusting the (implicitly given) edge assignment map α(introduced in
Section 6.10). There are two possible cases.
First, let us assume that elies above f, as illustrated in Figure 6.19a. If weis
connected to vfby a directed path of tree edges, then there must be a path of
tree edges from wfto a reticulate node rthat is a stable ancestor for L(D). This
is because we need to be able to disrupt all paths from weto elements of L(D)
to obtain the cluster Cone. We cannot use more than one reticulate node to do
so because each such reticulate node would be contained in a different cycle thatcontains e, which is not possible in a galled tree. T o be able to obtain the cluster
Cone, the lowest stable ancestor of rmust lie above v
e. In this conﬁguration,
the clusters Cand C∪Dcan be obtained on both eand f, and so we can switch
the edge assignments for Cand C∪Doneand f, as indicated by the arrow in
Figure 6.19a. What if there is a reticulate node r/primeon the path from wetovf?T h e n
the set of leaves L(C) can only be reached if the edge to r/primeis turned on. We can
now argue as before to establish the existence of the reticulate node r, but then the
edges eand fwill lie in a cycle that goes through two different reticulate nodes, r
and r/prime, which is not possible in a galled tree.
The other case is that eand fare incomparable in N, as illustrated in
Figure 6.19b. Because weandwfmust both lie above L(C), the two edges are
contained in a reticulation cycle with reticulate node r, which is a stable ancestor

160 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) (b)
Figure 6.19 The two possible configurations for the two edges eand finN, as discussed in the proof
of Lemma 6.11.4. Either flies below e,a ss h o w ni n( a ) .O r eand fare incomparable, as
shown in (b). In either case, the assignment of clusters to edges in Ncan be modified so
as to ensure that the cluster Cappears below C∪DinN, as indicated by the arrows.
ofL(C). By the reticulation-separation property, there is a tree edge h=(r,u)
such that uis the lowest stable ancestor of L(C). Thus, we can change the edge
assignment so as to use the edge hto represent C, as indicated by the arrow in
Figure 6.19b. /square
Galled trees were initially introduced in the context of recombination networks
and we discuss this in Section 9.9.
6.11.2 Level-k networks
LetNb ear o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r k .I f Nis a galled tree, then by deﬁnition any
biconnected component of Ncontains precisely one reticulation. In the literature,
the maximum number of reticulations in any biconnected component of Nis
sometimes called the level ofNand we have the following deﬁnition [ 51]:
Deﬁnition 6.11.5 (Level-k network) Let N be a bicombining, rooted phylogenetic
network on X. If the maximum number of reticulations properly contained in any
biconnected component of N is k, then N is called a level-k network .
The deﬁnition of a multicombining level- knetwork is slightly different: in this case,
we require that any biconnected component of Ncontains at most k+1 reticulate
edges, as discussed in Section 6.9.
Note that, according to this deﬁnition, level-0 networks are trees and level-1
networks are galled trees. The name “level” is perhaps slightly misleading, as itsuggests a quantity that changes gradually as a network changes, for example, whenintroducing additional reticulations. However, for any number kone can easily

161 6.11 Topological constraints on rooted networks
(a) Level-1 network (b) Level-4 network
Figure 6.20 (a) A level-1 network with three reticulations. (b) A level- 4network obtained by introducing
one additional reticulation associated with h.
construct a level-1 network that immediately jumps to level- kafter addition of one
new reticulation, as indicated for k=4i nF i g u r e 6.20.
If a set of clusters ConXcan be represented by some level-k network N,t h e n
does there exist such a level- knetwork N/primethat is decomposable? The answer is
given by the following result [ 135]:
Theorem 6.11.6 (Level-k networks and decomposability) LetCbe a set of clusters
onX. If there exists a level-k network N that represents Cin the softwired sense for
some number k, then there also exists such a network N/primethat is decomposable with
respect to C.
Proof T o prove the result it sufﬁces to specify how to obtain a suitable level- k
network NHfrom the given network Nfor an arbitrary non-trivial component H
of the incompatibility graph IG(C), as we can then apply the divide-and-conquer
strategy described in Section 8.2to obtain the desired decomposable network N/prime.
The basic idea is to deﬁne NHas the rooted phylogenetic network that is induced
inNby the set of taxa mentioned in H. The crucial point is that the level of the
induced network will not exceed that of the original network N.
More formally, assume that we are given a level- knetwork Nthat represents a set
of clusters ConXfor some number k.L e tC/primebe the set of clusters contained in some
non-trivial component Hof the incompatibility graph IG(C)a n dl e t X/primebe the
set of taxa that are present in C/prime. Consider the equivalence relation on X/primein which
two taxa are equivalent if and only if they are not separated by C/prime.L e t ¯X/primedenote
a subset of X/primeobtained by choosing one taxon for each equivalence class. Then it
holds that the network ¯Ninduced in Nby¯X/primerepresents C/prime|¯X/prime,a sr e q u i r e db yt h e
divide-and-conquer strategy. Lemma 6.10.2 states that all edges in Nthat represent
clusters from C/primemust be contained in the same biconnected component QofN.
Hence, it follows that all edges in ¯Ncome from the same biconnected component,
Q. As the computation of an induced subnetwork does not involve creating new

162 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Galled tree (b) Galled network (c) Not a galled network
Figure 6.21 (a) A galled tree. (b) A galled network. (c) A rooted phylogenetic network that is neither a
galled tree nor a galled network. The first network is a level-1 network, whereas the other
two are both level- 2networks.
reticulate nodes, the level of ¯Nwill be at most the number of reticulations in Q,
which is ≤k. /square
In Section 8.5we describe an algorithm that takes as input a set of clusters C
onXand computes as output a level- knetwork that represents C, with the aim of
minimizing k.
6.11.3 Galled networks
LetNb ear o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r k N.Atree cycle inNis an undirected cycle Z
that consists of two disjoint paths, each consisting of a chain of tree edges followedby exactly one reticulate edge, and both joining a ﬁxed tree node a,c a l l e dt h e apex ,
to the same reticulate node r.
Galled trees are rooted phylogenetic networks that contain isolated reticulations
and so one can view them as a ﬁrst generalization of rooted phylogenetic trees.However, they have the draw-back that a given set of clusters might not possess arepresentation in terms of a galled tree. This is also true for level- knetworks, for
any ﬁxed k. We now introduce a third type of topological constraint that does not
suffer from this problem [ 129, 131], see Figure 6.21b for an example:
Deﬁnition 6.11.7 (Galled network) A bicombining rooted phylogenetic network N
is called a galled network , if every reticulation in N has a tree cycle.
This deﬁnition can easily be extended to multicombining networks. In this case,we require that for each reticulate node rand every pair of in-edges pand qofr
there exists a tree cycle that contains rand goes through pand q.
Equivalently, a rooted (possibly multi-combining) phylogenetic network is a
galled network if and only if it holds that no two reticulate nodes can be connectedby a directed path that is contained in a single biconnected component.

163 6.11 Topological constraints on rooted networks
Figure 6.22 Any set of clusters on Xcan be represented by a galled network using a construction that
is illustrated here for X={a,..., i}. For all leaves except the one labeled by the first taxon
(in this example, a), the source of each leaf edge is a reticulate node that is connected to
two parent nodes vandw. Any cluster CofXthat contains the first taxon is represented
by the edge e, whereas any cluster that does not contain the first taxon is represented by
edge f, both in the softwired sense.
For any set of clusters ConXthere exists a galled network Nthat represents C.
We illustrate how to construct such a network in Figure 6.22. Hence, an algorithm
that aims at computing a galled network for a given input dataset never has tofail.
The most important mathematical property of a galled network Nis that every
reticulation rseparates the network into two sets of nodes, namely (a) the set of all
nodes that can be reached from the root ρby a directed path that avoids rand (b)
the set of all nodes that can only be reached by a path that passes through r.W e
call this property the separation property [129]:
Lemma6.11.8 (Separation Lemma) Let N=(V,E,λ)be a (not necessarily bicom-
bining) galled network and r a reticulation in N. Let R ⊆V be the set of all nodes
that are descendants of r . Then every (directed or undirected) path from any node v
in V−Rt oa n yn o d e win R must pass through r .
Proof We ﬁrst show that any edge efrom a node in V−Rto a node in Rmust be
a reticulate edge. Let e=(v,w )b ea n ye d g ew i t h v∈V−Randw∈R.I fw=r,
then eis a reticulate edge, because ris a reticulate node, by assumption. Otherwise,
by deﬁnition of R, there exists a path Pfrom rtow. By deﬁnition of V−R,t h e
path Pdoes not contain e.H e n c e ,t h ei n d e g r e eo fw must be at least two and so e
is a reticulate edge.
Now, let e=(v,w )b ea n ye d g ef r o man o d ei n V−Rto a node in Rand
assume that w/negationslash=r.L e t f=(u,w)b ea ne d g ef r o ms o m en o d e uinRtow,
which must exist, by deﬁnition of R. Any undirected cycle containing eand fmust

164 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
contain another edge connecting a node in V−Rto a node in R. Since this edge
is a reticulate edge, it follows that any undirected cycle containing eand fmust
contain a third reticulate edge, which contradicts the assumption that Nis a galled
network. Hence, we must have w=rand so Nhas the separation property. /square
LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let Nbe a galled network that represents
C.W es a yt h a t Nis aminimum galled network , if it minimizes the following three
q u a n t i t i e s( i nt h i so r d e ro fp r i o r i t y ) :
(i) the number of reticulate nodes,
(ii) the number of clusters represented by edges contained in reticulate cycles, and
(iii) the number of edges in the network.The following result justiﬁes the fact that we restrict our attention to decomposablegalled networks:Lemma 6.11.9 (Minimum galled networks are decomposable) LetCbe a set of
clusters on Xand let N be a minimum galled network that represents Cin the softwired
sense (if one exists), then N is decomposable.A proof of this result for the restricted case of galled networks that fulﬁll thetree-child property can be found in [ 127]. For the general case, see [152 ].
In Section 8.4we discuss how to compute a minimum galled network Nfor a
given set of clusters CinX.
6.11.4 Tree-child networks and visible reticulations
One attractive property to require of a rooted phylogenetic network is the following[41]:
Deﬁnition 6.11.10 (T ree-child property) Let N be a rooted phylogenetic network
onX.An o d ev of N is said to have the tree-child property, if it has at least one child
that is a tree node. We say that N has the tree-child property, if all internal nodes of
N have the property.
An easy consequence of this is that every internal node vin such a network Nis
the ancestor of at least one leaf via a path of tree edges. All three networks shown inFigure 6.21 have the tree-child property, while the one displayed in Figure 6.22 does
not because there all children of the node ware reticulate nodes. The following
result is not immediately obvious:Lemma 6.11.11 (Galled trees are tree-child) If a rooted phylogenetic network N is
a galled tree, then it has the tree-child property.

165 6.11 Topological constraints on rooted networks
Proof T o see that the claim is true, consider an internal node vand assume that
vdoes not have the tree-child property, in other words, that all children of vare
reticulate nodes. Then vcannot be a reticulate node, because vand any child of v
are contained in the same biconnected component of N, and no such component
may contain more than one reticulate node, by deﬁnition of a galled tree. Theneither vis the root node, or vcan only have one in-edge, which is a tree edge. In
the former case, any reticulate child of vmust either be connected to vby two
reticulate edges, which is not allowed, or is otherwise the descendant of one of theother reticulate children of v, in contradiction to the deﬁnition of a galled tree. In
the latter case, vmust have at least two children, because otherwise vwould be a
suppressible node (that has both indegree one and outdegree one), which is notallowed in N. In summary, vhas at least two (or more) children that are reticulate
nodes and their undirected cycles both contain the in-edge of v, in contradiction
to the assumption that Nis a galled tree.
/square
However, this result does not hold for galled networks:
Exercise 6.11.12 (Galled networks are not tree-child) Construct an example of a
galled network that does not have the tree-child property.We now introduce a property that is weaker than the tree-child property, but thatsufﬁces to ensure that the cluster containment problem, as discussed below, can beefﬁciently solved for such networks, although the problem is computationally hardin general.Deﬁnition 6.11.13 (Visible reticulation) Let N be a rooted phylogenetic network.
A reticulate node r in N is called visible , if it is a stable ancestor of some leaf v.
We say that a rooted phylogenetic network Nhas the visibility property ,i fa l l
itsreticulate nodes are visible. When sampling a cluster Cfrom Nwe can “see”
whether a reticulation edge leading to reticulation ris turned on or off, by simply
checking whether the taxon xassociated with a leaf vthat fulﬁlls the requirements
is present in C,s e eF i g u r e 6.23. By deﬁnition, every tree-child network has the
visibility property, moreover:Lemma 6.11.14 (Reticulations in a galled network are visible) If a rooted phyloge-
netic network N is a galled network, then all its reticulations are visible.Proof Letrb ear e t i c u l a t en o d ei n N.I frhas outdegree 0, then ris a leaf and we are
done. Now, assume that the outdegree of ris≥1. Let Hdenote the set of all nodes
that can be reached from rby some directed path of tree edges, including r.I fH
contains a leaf, then ris visible and we are done. Otherwise, let r
/primebe a reticulate
node that can be reached from some node in Hby crossing a single reticulate edge.

166 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 6.23 In (a), the two reticulations sand tare visible, but ris not. In (b), ris visible, because there
exists a path of tree edges from rto the leaf labeled e. However, in (c) there is no path of
tree edges from rto the leaf labeled ebecause of the reticulate node u. Nevertheless, ris
visible because ris a stable ancestor of e.
Letzbe some leaf that is a descendant of r/prime. By the Separation Lemma 6.11.8,a l l
paths from the root of Ntozmust go through r/prime, and so r/primeis a stable ancestor of
z. This implies that ri sv i s i b l ei nt h i sc a s e ,t o o . /square
6.11.5 Tree-sibling networks
In a network, two nodes uandvare called siblings , if they share a parent. If a rooted
phylogenetic network Ndoes not satisfy the tree-child property, then it might still
satisfy the following requirement [38]:Deﬁnition 6.11.15 (T ree-sibling property) Let N be a rooted phylogenetic network
onX.An o d ev of N is said to have the tree-sibling property, if it has at least one
sibling that is a tree node. We say that N has the tree-sibling property, if all reticulate
nodes of N have the property.Since the tree-child property is clearly more restrictive than the tree-sibling one,we have the following result:Lemma 6.11.16 (Galled trees are tree-sibling) If a rooted phylogenetic network N
is a galled tree, then it has the tree-sibling property.Exercise 6.11.17 (Proof) Prove Lemma 6.11.16.
This result does not hold for galled networks:Exercise 6.11.18 (Galled networks are not tree-sibling) Construct an example of a
galled network that does not have the tree-sibling property.
6.11.6 Time-consistent rooted networks
Consider a rooted phylogenetic network Nthat represents the evolution of some
set of taxa Xand assume that the reticulate nodes represent putative hybridization

167 6.11 Topological constraints on rooted networks
(a) Time consistent (b) Not time consistent (c) Not time consistent
Figure 6.24 (a) A rooted phylogenetic network whose inner nodes are consistently labeled by time
stamps. (b) A rooted phylogenetic network for which no consistent labeling by time stampsexists. This is because the parent pof the reticulate node ris also an ancestor of q, the
other parent of r. (c) Another network for which no consistent labeling exists, even though
no reticulation is formed between a node and one of its ancestors.
events, say. For a hybrid species to form, the two parent species must exist at thesame time. This requirement implies a topological constraint on the network N
[16]:
Deﬁnition 6.11.19 (Time-consistent network) A rooted phylogenetic network N
onXis called time consistent , if there exists a consistent labeling of its nodes by time
stamps such that:
(i)The time stamp of a tree node is larger than the time stamp of its parent node.
(ii)The parents of a reticulate node, and the reticulate node itself, all have the sametime stamp.
The labeling describes a possible ordering of speciation and reticulation events,but not necessarily actual times, of course. In Figure 6.24 we show an example of
a time-consistent network and two examples of networks that do not have thisproperty. Time consistency is used later in Section 6.14.
Exercise 6.11.20 (Prove not time consistent) Verify that the rooted phylogenetic
network shown in Figure 6.24c is not time consistent.
Note that the network shown in Figure 6.24b is a galled tree and is not time
consistent. This implies that galled networks, galled trees, tree-child and tree-sibling networks may all fail to be time consistent. Although time consistencyseems to be quite a natural requirement, not even cluster networks always fulﬁll it.Figure 6.24c shows a cluster network that is not time consistent.
Exercise 6.11.21 (Cluster networks are not time consistent) Show that the network
displayed in Figure 6.24ci sac l u s t e rn e t w o r ko n X={a,...,e }for some suitable set
of clusters C.

168 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
6.12 Cluster containment in rooted networks
One of the main goals of phylogenetic analysis is to determine clusters that representclades of closely related species and one of the main uses of a rooted phylogenetictree or network is to provide a representation of such clusters. Hence, an importantquestion is: How easy is it to determine whether a particular cluster is contained in a
given tree or network?Problem 6.12.1 (Cluster containment problem) For a given rooted phylogenetic
network N and a given cluster C, on X,t h e cluster containment problem is to
determine whether the cluster C is represented by N.
6.12.1 Cluster containment in hardwired networks
First, consider the case of a rooted phylogenetic tree TonX={x1,..., xn}(viewed
as a special case of a network). We can determine, in linear time in n,w h e t h e ra
given cluster Cis represented in T.
Exercise 6.12.2 (Linear time cluster containment for trees) Design an algorithm
that determines whether a given cluster C is represented by a given rooted phylogenetictree T in linear time.Next, consider the case of a cluster network NonX={x
1,..., xn}.W ed e n o t et h e
number of clusters represented by Nask.T on a i v e l yd e t e r m i n ew h e t h e rs o m eg i v e n
cluster ConXis represented in N, search for an appropriate edge ein a post-order
traversal. As the number of edges in NisO(k2), determining containment requires
at most O(n×k2) steps.
Now consider any rooted phylogenetic network NonX={x1,..., xn},n o t
necessarily a cluster network. Again, we can easily check whether a given cluster
Cis represented in Nin the hardwired sense using a postorder traversal of N.I n
this more general case, the time required is proportional to the number of edgestimes n.
6.12.2 Cluster containment in softwired networks
Consider a rooted phylogenetic network NonXthat we interpret in the softwired
sense. In this case a simple traversal of the network does not sufﬁce to determinewhether a given cluster ConXis represented in N.T h i si sb e c a u s e ,i nt h i sc a s e ,f o r
each reticulate node in N, we must decide which incoming reticulate edge to turn
on and which ones to turn off and the choices made at different reticulate nodesare interdependent in a non-trivial way. In fact, it turns out that the problem isdifﬁcult [145]:

169 6.12 Cluster containment in rooted networks
(a) (b)
Figure 6.25 (a) Each variable xiis represented in Nby this “variable gadget” configuration. (b) Each
clause θi=/lscripti1∨/lscripti2∨/lscripti3is represented in Nby this “clause gadget” configuration. Copies
of these two types of gadgets are used to construct the network shown in Figure 6.26.
Theorem 6.12.3 (Softwired cluster containment is hard) Let N be a rooted phy-
logenetic network and let C be a cluster on X. The problem of deciding whether
N represents the cluster in the softwired sense (that is, “contains” the cluster C) is
NP-complete.T o show that a decision problem is NP-complete, one must ﬁrst show that theproblem is contained in the class NP, that is, that a proposed solution can be
veriﬁed in polynomial time. We must then show that some other problem thatis known to be NP-complete reduces to the new problem in polynomial time. In
other words, the aim is to show that any algorithm that can solve the new problemin polynomial time would also solve all other problems that are NP-complete inpolynomial time.
If we are given a concrete choice of reticulate edge to turn on for each reticulation,
then to verify whether the corresponding rooted phylogenetic tree contains thegiven cluster Ccan be solved in polynomial time, as discussed above. Hence, the
problem of cluster containment in the softwired case is contained in NP .
In the following, we show that the problem is NP-complete by constructing a
reduction from the 3-SA T problem, or, to be precise, the 1-in-3-SA T problem [ 83].
In the 3-SAT problem, one is given a Boolean expression φ=θ
1∧θ2∧···∧ θhin
which each clause θiis the disjunction of exactly three literals, θi=/lscripti1∨/lscripti2∨/lscripti3,
fori=1,..., h. Recall that a literal is an expression of the form xor¯x(“not x”) for
some Boolean variable x.L e t x1,..., xkbe the set of kdifferent Boolean variables
that occur in the expression φ. The 3-SAT problem is to determine whether there
exists an assignment of Boolean values to the variables x1,..., xksuch that the
expression φevaluates to true.
T o transform an instance of the 3-SAT problem into an instance of the cluster
containment problem, we construct a rooted phylogenetic network in a numberof steps. For each variable x
iwe deﬁne a small “variable gadget” consisting of four
nodes and edges: we create two nodes xiand ¯xiand two leaves labeled tiand fi,
representing truth values true and false, respectively. These four nodes are thenj o i n e db ye d g e si na“ b u t t e r ﬂ y ”c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o na ss h o w ni nF i g u r e 6.25a.

170 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
Figure 6.26 The rooted phylogenetic network Nconstructed for the Boolean expression φ=(¯x1∨¯x2∨
x3)∧(x1∨x2∨x3)∧(¯x1∨¯x2∨¯x3). Variable gadgets in the middle of the network represent
the different variables x1,..., xn. Clause gadgets at the bottom of the network represent the
clauses θ1,...,θ k. Turning on all reticulate edges highlighted in gray demonstrates that this
particular expression is satisfiable.
For each clause θi=/lscripti1∨/lscripti2∨/lscripti3we build a “clause gadget” by connecting the
three literal nodes /lscripti1,/lscripti2and/lscripti3to a new leaf labeled θi,s e eF i g u r e6.25b.
A rooted phylogenetic network Nis then obtained by creating a root node ρ
with two children fand twhich are both connected to all literal nodes xiand ¯xi,
see the example shown in Figure 6.26.N o t et h a tt h es e to ft a x ai sg i v e nb yt h es e t
of labels of all leaves X={θ1,...,θ h,t1,...,t k,f1,..., fk}.
Now, to determine whether there exists an assignment of truth values to all
variables x1,..., xksuch that the given expression φevaluates to true, we need to
determine whether there exists a choice of reticulation edges to switch on, one foreach reticulate node, such that the subtree below node tcontains all leaves labeled
θ
1,...,θ hand t1,..., tk, and that the subtree below node fcontains all leaves
labeled f1,..., fk.
By construction of this network N, the cluster {θ1,...,θ h,t1,..., tk}is repre-
sented in Nin the softwired sense if and only if the given expression φcan be
satisﬁed. Hence, any algorithm that could solve the cluster containment problemin polynomial time would also solve 3-SAT in polynomial time and so the problemis NP-complete.Exercise 6.12.4 (Another solution) Find another choice of edges to turn on in
Figure 6.26 so that the expression is demonstrated to be satisﬁable.
6.12.3 Cluster containment for visible reticulations
We now turn to rooted phylogenetic networks that have the property that allreticulations are visible. We have the following new result:

171 6.14 Comparing rooted networks
Lemma 6.12.5 (Cluster containment for visible reticulations is easy) Let N be a
rooted phylogenetic network that has the visibility property. Let e be some edge of Nand let C
/subsetnoteqlXbe a non-empty cluster. We can determine whether C is represented
by e in polynomial time.Proof LetCbe a cluster on Xand let Nbe a rooted phylogenetic network on X
that has the visibility property. Consider an edge e=(v,w )o fN. We can efﬁciently
determine whether Cis represented by ein a traversal of the part of the rooted
phylogenetic network Nthat lies below the target node wofe, as follows.
First, let Hbe the set of all nodes below wthat can be reached by only using tree
edges. If Hcontains any leaf whose label is not contained in C, then the cluster C
cannot be represented by the edge e.
Otherwise, while there is a node uinHt h a ti st h es o u r c eo fs o m er e t i c u l a t ee d g e
f, repeat the following:
Letrb et h er e t i c u l a t en o d ea tt h eo t h e re n do f f. By visibility, ris a stable
ancestor of some leaf z.I ft h el a b e lo f zis contained in C, then turn the edge fon,
and otherwise turn foff. If fwas turned on, extend the set Hby adding the set of
all nodes for which ris a stable ancestor.
Once the repetitions of this step have been completed, to determine whether the
cluster Cis represented by ewe check that the set of all labels of nodes in Hequals
Cand that no reticulate node ris encountered that has all its input edges turned
off (which can only happen if its lowest stable ancestor lsa(r) lies below w).
/square
Because all tree-child networks, galled trees and galled networks have the
required visibility property, we have:Corollary 6.12.6 (Easy cases of cluster containment) The cluster containment prob-
lem can be solved efﬁciently for tree-child networks, galled trees and galled networks.
6.13 Tree containment
The problem of determining whether a given rooted phylogenetic network N
contains a given rooted phylogenetic tree T,o nX,i sN P - c o m p l e t e[ 145].
6.14 Comparing rooted networks
Suppose we are given two different phylogenetic networks N1and N2onX,a s
shown in Figure 6.27, say. How to measure their similarity? For phylogenetic trees,
this question can be answered in a number of ways. For example, we could usethe Robinson-Foulds distance to compare two unrooted phylogenetic trees, or thecluster distance to compare two rooted phylogenetic trees (Section 3.16). Because

172 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Network N1 (b) Network N2
Figure 6.27 Two distinct rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2that represent different sets of hard-
wired clusters, softwired clusters, and rooted phylogenetic trees.
splits and clusters correspond one-to-one to the edges of an associated unrooted orrooted phylogenetic tree, respectively, comparing the splits or clusters representedby two trees is equivalent to comparing the trees themselves.
For rooted phylogenetic networks, the situation is different. The association
between a set of clusters or trees and the phylogenetic network used to represent thedata is quite loose. For example, consider the two networks N
3and N4in Figure 6.28.
These two networks are topologically distinct, but, in a sense, indistinguishable ,
because they represent the same set of hardwired clusters, the same set of softwiredclusters and the same set of rooted phylogenetic trees. So, comparing the clusters ortrees represented by two rooted phylogenetic networks is not the same as comparingthe networks themselves.
While biologists are not very interested in distinguishing between different net-
works that are indistinguishable in the above sense, this question has neverthelessobtained some attention in the computational literature and we report on some ofthe results in this section.
Below, we ﬁrst discuss a number of distance functions that aim at comparing
the represented data and then look at some measures that are based on topologicalinvariants of the networks. With the exception of the subnetwork distance, none ofthem provide a proper metric for the set of rooted phylogenetic networks on X,a s
they all return a distance of zero for the two distinct networks N
3and N4displayed
in Figure 6.28, and thus fail to fulﬁll the identity property of Deﬁnition 3.12.1.
Exercise 6.14.1 (Two indistinguishable networks) Show that the two rooted phylo-
genetic networks N 3and N 4displayed in Figure 6.28 r e p r e s e n tt h es a m es e to fh a r d wi r e d
clusters, the same set of softwired clusters and the same set of rooted phylogenetic trees.There is another issue to consider. Rooted phylogenetic networks are usually com-puted from an input set of incompatible clusters or an input set of incongruent

173 6.14 Comparing rooted networks
(a) Network N3 (b) Network N4
Figure 6.28 Two topologically distinct rooted phylogenetic networks N3and N4that represent the same
hardwired clusters, softwired clusters and rooted phylogenetic trees.
rooted phylogenetic trees, on X. The size of such an input dataset is usually poly-
nomial in the number of taxa. However, a rooted phylogenetic network Nthat
is computed to represent such a dataset will, in general, represent an exponentialnumber of softwired clusters or rooted phylogenetic trees. This is due to the factthat each reticulation added to the network can potentially double the number ofrepresented softwired clusters or trees. So, a direct comparison of the softwiredclusters or rooted phylogenetic trees represented by two different networks willsometimes be infeasible, due to the large number of objects, and might be mislead-ing, if most of the clusters or trees compared are not objects that the network isintended to represent.
6.14.1 Comparing hardwired networks
Let N1and N2be two rooted phylogenetic networks on X, interpreted in the
hardwired sense. A natural way to compare two such networks is to compute theirhardwired cluster distance , a simple extension of the cluster distance for rooted
phylogenetic trees (see Section 3.16), deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 6.14.2 (Hardwired cluster distance) Let N
1and N 2be two rooted phy-
logenetic networks on X. We deﬁne the hardwired cluster distance dhardbetween N 1
and N 2as the cardinality of the symmetric difference of the two sets of hardwired
clusters represented by the two networks, divided by two:
dhard(N1,N2)=|Chard(N1)/triangleChard(N2)|
2. (6.5)
The hardwired distance between any two rooted phylogenetic networks on Xis
easy to compute, because the number of hardwired clusters represented by a rootedphylogenetic network equals the number of tree edges in the network. For example,the hardwired distance between the two rooted phylogenetic networks N
1and N2
displayed in Figure 6.27 equals one, because there is exactly one cluster, {c,e},

174 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
that is only represented by N1, and there is exactly one cluster, {d,e},t h a ti so n l y
represented by N2.
The two rooted phylogenetic networks N3and N4shown in Figure 6.28 are
topologically distinct, however they both represent exactly the same set of hardwiredclusters. So, although the hardwired cluster distance is a proper metric for sets ofclusters (represented by hardwired networks), it is not a proper metric on thenetworks themselves.
6.14.2 Comparing softwired networks
Let N1and N2b et w or o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r k so n X, interpreted in the
softwired sense. A natural way to compare two such networks is to compute theirsoftwired cluster distance , which is another simple extension of the cluster distance
for rooted phylogenetic trees (see Section 3.16), deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 6.14.3 (Softwired cluster distance) Let N
1and N 2be two rooted phylo-
genetic networks on X. We deﬁne the softwired cluster distance dsoftbetween N 1and
N2as the cardinality of the symmetric difference of the two sets of softwired clusters
represented by the two networks, divided by two:
dsoft(N1,N2)=|Csoft(N1)/triangleCsoft(N2)|
2. (6.6)
For example, the softwired cluster distance between the two rooted phylogeneticnetworks N
1and N2displayed in Figure 6.27 is5
2, because there are exactly four
softwired clusters that are only contained in N1, namely {a,b},{b,d},{c,e},a n d
{a,b,d}, and there is exactly one that is only contained in N2, namely {d,e}.
A rooted phylogenetic network NonXcan represent an exponential number of
different softwired clusters, in the worst case, making this distance impractical touse in general. However, in Section 6.8we saw that the number of softwired clusters
depends exponentially on the maximal number of reticulations that span any giventree edge in a rooted phylogenetic network. While this number might be quite largein the context of the population genetics of sexually reproducing organisms, say, inphylogenetic applications this number should often be fairly small.
Moreover, for some topologically restricted classes of rooted phylogenetic net-
works, such as galled trees and level-k networks for a ﬁxed level k,t h en u m b e ro f
softwired clusters is polynomial and so, for such networks, the softwired clusterdistance can always be computed efﬁciently.
The two rooted phylogenetic networks N
3and N4shown in Figure 6.28 both
represent the same set of softwired clusters, but are topologically distinct. Thus,while the softwired cluster distance is a proper metric on sets of clusters (representedby softwired networks), it is not a proper metric for the networks themselves.

175 6.14 Comparing rooted networks
One way to avoid the computational difﬁculties of the softwired cluster distance
is to use the hardwired cluster distance, even when comparing rooted phylogeneticnetworks that are being interpreted in the softwired sense. This seems to be areasonable heuristic, because every cluster that is represented by a rooted phylo-genetic network in the hardwired sense is also represented by that network in thesoftwired sense. However, it is unclear how well the two different distance measuresare correlated.
The tripartition distance
The tripartition distance was introduced in an attempt to provide a metric for
s o f t w i r e dn e t w o r k st h a ti se a s yt oc o m p u t e[ 179].
T o describe this approach, we need to introduce some additional simple deﬁni-
tions. Let Nbe a rooted phylogenetic network on X.R e c a l lt h a ta na n c e s t o r uof
an o d ev inNis called a stable ancestor, if every path from the root to vpasses
through u. If this is not the case, then we refer to uas an unstable ancestor .B y
symmetry, we call vastable descendant ofu,i fu is a stable ancestor of v,a n dw e
callvaunstable descendant ofu,i fu is an unstable ancestor of v.
Deﬁnition 6.14.4 (Tripartitions of a network) Let N be a rooted phylogenetic
network on X. The tripartition associated with a tree edge e =(v,w )in N is deﬁned
as
θ(e)=(A(e),B(e),C(e)), (6.7)
where
(i)A(e)={x∈X|x labels a stable descendant of w},
(ii) B(e)={x∈X|x labels an unstable descendant of w},a n d
(iii) C(e)={x∈X|x labels a node that is not a descendant of w}.
We use /Theta1(N)to denote the (multi-)set of tripartitions obtained from all internal tree
edges in N.The set of all tripartitions of a rooted network is easy to compute, and so thefollowing distance based on comparing the tripartitions can be easily calculated:Deﬁnition 6.14.5 (Tripartition distance) The tripartition distance between two
rooted phylogenetic networks N
1and N 2onXis deﬁned as:
dtripart (N1,N2)=|/Theta1(N1)/triangle/Theta1(N2)|
2. (6.8)

176 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) Network N5 (b) Network N6
Figure 6.29 Two distinct rooted phylogenetic networks N5and N6that represent different softwired
clusters but have tripartition distance zero.
As an example for this distance function, consider the two rooted phylogeneticnetworks N
1and N2shown in Figure 6.27. The ﬁve internal tree edges of N1give
rise to the following ﬁve tripartitions:
({a,b,d},{c},{e}),({a},{b,c},{d,e}),({d},{b,c},{a,e}),
({e},{c},{a,b,d}),({b},{c},{a,d,e}).
The ﬁve internal tree edges of N2give rise to the following ﬁve tripartitions:
({a,b,c},{d},{e}),({a},{b,c},{d,e}),(∅,{b,c,d},{a,e}),
({e},{d},{a,b,c}),({b,c},∅,{a,b}).
As the two networks have only one tripartition in common, the tripartition distanceisd
tripart (N1,N2)=8
2=4.
On rooted phylogenetic trees, the tripartition distance equals the cluster dis-
tance. In [ 179], it was claimed that the tripartition distance is a proper metric on
rooted phylogenetic networks. However, this assertion is now known to be false.For example, the networks N
5and N6displayed in Figure 6.29 are distinct, and
represent distinct sets of softwired clusters, and yet their tripartition distance iszero.Exercise 6.14.6 (Tripartition distance) Show that the two networks N
5and N 6
displayed in Figure 6.29 represent different sets of softwired clusters, and have a
tripartition distance of zero.The tripartition distance is a proper metric on the set of all rooted phylogeneticnetworks that have the tree-child property and are time consistent [ 39]:

177 6.14 Comparing rooted networks
Lemma 6.14.7 (Metric on tree-child time-consistent networks) The tripartition
distance is a proper metric on the set of all rooted phylogenetic networks that have thetree-child property and are time consistent.
6.14.3 Comparing networks representing trees
LetN1and N2be two rooted phylogenetic networks on X. If the networks are
being used to represent a collection of rooted phylogenetic trees on X,t h e ni t
seems reasonable to base their comparison on the (multi-)sets of trees that theyrepresent, using the displayed trees distance:
Deﬁnition 6.14.8 (Displayed trees distance) Let N
1and N 2be two rooted phylo-
genetic networks on X. We deﬁne the displayed tree distance dtreesbetween N 1and
N2as the cardinality of the symmetric difference of the two sets of rooted phylogenetic
trees represented by the two networks, divided by two:
dtrees(N1,N2)=|T(N1)/triangleT(N2)|
2. (6.9)
The two rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2displayed in Figure 6.27 both
represent four rooted phylogenetic trees each (if we distinguish between multipleoccurrences of the same tree), but they have only two trees in common. Thus, thedisplayed tree distance between N
1and N2is two.
As in the case of the softwired clusters distance, the use of this distance function
is limited by the fact that the number of objects to be compared is exponential inthe worst case.
The two rooted phylogenetic networks N
3and N4displayed in Figure 6.28
represent the same set of trees, so their displayed trees distance is zero, althoughthe two networks are distinct. Hence, the displayed trees distance is not a propermetric for rooted phylogenetic networks.
6.14.4 Comparing the topology of networks
Two rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2onXare called isomorphic ,i ft h e r e
exists a directed-graph isomorphism between them that preserves the labeling ofthe leaves. The isomorphism distance function assigns a distance of 0 between any
two isomorphic networks and 1 between any two non-isomorphic ones. The com-plexity of determining whether two rooted phylogenetic networks are isomorphic isunknown. However, if both the indegrees and outdegrees of all nodes are bounded,then isomorphism can be checked in polynomial time [ 168].
The isomorphism distance does not tell us how similar two non-isomorphic
networks are. T o obtain a more useful distance function, we proceed as follows. For

178 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
Figure 6.30 The rooted phylogenetic networks N3and N4in Figure 6.28 share exactly the same set of
proper subnetworks list here. The two networks differ only as complete networks.
a rooted phylogenetic network N=(V,E)o nXand any node vofN,w ed e ﬁ n e
thesubnetwork N (v) associated with vto be the rooted phylogenetic network N|V/prime
that is embedded in Nand is induced by the set V/primeof all nodes that are descendants
ofv, with root v. For an example, see Figure 6.30. We use /Omega1(N)t od e n o t et h e
multi-set of all rooted phylogenetic networks that are subnetworks of Nand we
deﬁne [40]:
Deﬁnition 6.14.9 (Subnetwork distance) Let N 1and N 2be two rooted phylogenetic
networks on X. The subnetwork isomorphism distance between N 1and N 2is deﬁned
as
dsub−net(N1,N2)=|/Omega1(N1)/triangle/Omega1(N2)|
2. (6.10)
As an example, consider the two rooted phylogenetic networks N3and N4displayed
in Figure 6.28. They both have the same proper subnetworks, listed in Figure 6.30.
But as the full networks themselves are also considered subnetworks, the symmetricdifference of the two sets has cardinality two and so the subnetwork distance isd
sub−net(N1,N2)=1.
In addition to this approach, a number of simpler distance functions have been
suggested that try and capture how topologically similar two rooted phylogeneticnetworks are. They are based on comparing basic topological invariants of thenetworks that can be computed efﬁciently. Also, they are easier to use than theisomorphism-based approach when comparing two networks “by hand” . In thefollowing, we describe the two that are perhaps most useful.
The path-multiplicity distance
LetNbe a rooted phylogenetic network on X={x1,..., xn}.T h epath-multiplicity
distance is based on the idea of counting the number of different paths from any

179 6.14 Comparing rooted networks
given node to each of the leaves in N.T h epath-multiplicity vector of a node vinN
is deﬁned as
µ(v)=(m1(v),...,m n(v)), (6.11)
where mi(v) is the number of different directed paths from vto the leaf with label xi
(for i=1,...,n ). Letµ(N) denote the (multi-)set of all path-multiplicity vectors
obtained for all internal nodes of N. The set of all path-multiplicity vectors is easy
to compute and we deﬁne a distance by comparing the sets of path-multiplicityvectors [ 41]:
Deﬁnition 6.14.10 (Path-multiplicity distance) The path-multiplicity distance
(also called the µ-distance) between two rooted phylogenetic networks N
1and N 2on
Xis deﬁned as
dpath(N1,N2)=|µ(N1)/triangleµ(N2)|
2. (6.12)
As an example, consider the two rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2displayed
in Figure 6.27. Both have eight internal nodes. Processing the nodes from top-left
to bottom-right, the path vectors associated with network N1are:
(1,2,3,1,1),(1,2,2,1,0),(1,1,1,0,0),(0,1,1,1,0),
(0,0,1,0,1),(0,1,1,0,0),(0,1,1,0,0),(0,0,1,0,0).
Similarly, for N2we obtain:
(1,2,2,2,1),(1,2,2,1,0),(1,1,1,0,0),(0,1,1,1,0),
(0,0,0,1,1),(0,1,1,0,0),(0,1,1,0,0),(0,0,0,1,0).
The symmetric difference between the two listed sets contains six elements and sod
path(N1,N2)=3.
Exercise 6.14.11 (Indistinguishability) Show that the path-multiplicity distance
between the two distinct rooted phylogenetic networks N 3and N 4displayed in
Figure 6.28 is zero.
The two networks depicted in Figure 6.28 show that the path multiplicity distance
is not a metric on the set of all rooted phylogenetic networks. However, the path-multiplicity distance is a proper metric on the set of all root phylogenetic networksthat have the tree-child property [ 41]:
Lemma 6.14.12 (Metric on tree-child networks) The path-multiplicity distance is
a proper metric on the set of all rooted phylogenetic networks that have the tree-childproperty.

180 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
Moreover, the path-multiplicity distance is a also proper metric on the followingset of rooted phylogenetic networks [ 38]:
Lemma6.14.13 ( M e t r i co nas u b s e to ft r e e - s i b l i n gn e t w o r k s ) The path-multiplicity
distance is a proper metric on the set of all bicombining rooted phylogenetic networksthat have the tree-sibling property and are time consistent.
The nested-labels distance
The ﬁnal distance function that we consider is the nested-labels distance. In orderto compute this distance function, we assign nested labels to all nodes of a rooted
phylogenetic network NonXrecursively as follows:
(i) The nested label of a leaf is the taxon that labels the leaf.
(ii) The nested label of an internal node is deﬁned as the multi-set of all nested
labels of its children.
Letϒ(N) denote the multi-set of all nested labels assigned to nodes of N.T h e
nested-labels distance can be deﬁned as follows [ 40,183]:
Deﬁnition 6.14.14 (Nested-labels distance) The nested-labels distance between
two rooted phylogenetic networks N
1and N 2onXis deﬁned as
dnested (N1,N2)=|ϒ(N1)/triangleϒ(N2)|
2. (6.13)
As an example, consider the two rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2shown
in Figure 6.27. The leaf nodes give rise to the nested labels a,b,..., e. Although the
l a b e l sa r ec o m p u t e db o t t o m - u p ,w er e p o r tt h e mh e r ef r o mt o p - l e f tt ob o t t o m - r i g h t .The nested labels of network N
1are:
{{{a,{{b,{c}}}},{{{b,{c}}},d}},{{c},e}},
{{a,{{b,{c}}}},{{{b,{c}}},d}},
{a,{{b,{c}}}},
{{{b,{c}}},d},
{{b,{c}}},
{b,{c}},
{{c},e},
{c},
a,b,c,d,e.

181 6.14 Comparing rooted networks
The nodes of the network N2give rise to the following nested labels:
{{{{a},{{b,c}}},{{{b,c}},{d}}},{{d},e}},
{{{a},{{b,c}}},{{{b,c}},{d}}},
{{a},{{b,c}}},
{{{b,c}},{d}},
{{d},e},
{{b,c}},
{b,c},
{d},
a,b,c,d,e.
The symmetric difference of these two sets contains 16 labels and so we haved
nested (N1,N2)=16
2=8.
Exercise 6.14.15 (Indistinguishability) Show that the nested label distance between
the two distinct rooted phylogenetic networks N 3and N 4displayed in Figure 6.28 is
zero.In [40] it is shown that this distance is a proper metric on a number of different
classes of networks. Here we report one of the results:Lemma 6.14.16 (Metric on tree-child networks) The nested label distance is a
proper metric on the set of all rooted phylogenetic networks that have the tree-childproperty.
6.14.5 Alignment of rooted phylogenetic networks
T o aid a visual comparison of two rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2onX,
it would be helpful to algorithmically match nodes that are similarly situated in thetwo networks. In general terms, an alignment of two rooted phylogenetic networks
N
1and N2onXis given by a one-to-one mapping between a subset of the nodes
ofN1and a subset of the nodes of N2,w h i c hd e ﬁ n e sas e to f aligned pairs of nodes.
In the computation of the path-multiplicity distance in Section 6.14.4,e a c h
internal node in both rooted phylogenetic networks under comparison is assigneda path-multiplicity vector. These vectors can be used to compute an alignmentbetween the two networks [ 41].
In more detail, consider the network alignment graph A (N
1,N2)=(V1∪V2,E),
w h o s en o d es e ti st h eu n i o no ft h es e t V1of internal nodes of network N1and the
setV2of internal nodes of network N2, and whose edge set Econsists of all possible
edges between a node in V1and a node in V2.
In this bipartite graph, we assign a weight ω(e)t oe a c he d g ee =(v1,v2), with
v1∈V1andv2∈V2, that is base on the negative sum of absolute differences of the

182 Clusters and rooted phylogenetic networks
Figure 6.31 An alignment of the two rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2. Dashed lines are used to
connect aligned pairs of nodes. For simplicity, we have omitted the lines between the tworoot nodes and between the paired leaves.
components of the path-multiplicity vectors µ(v 1)a n dµ(v 2), namely
ω((v 1,v2))=W−n/summationdisplay
i=1|mi(v1)−mi(v2)|, (6.14)
where Wis a large constant that ensures that all weights will be non-negative. Recall
from graph theory that a matching M i sas e to fe d g e si nag r a p hs u c ht h a tn ot w o
nodes are incident to more than one edge in M.I ti sc a l l e da maximum weighted
matching , if, in addition, it maximizes the sum of edge weights/summationtext
e∈Mω(e). Deter-
mining a maximum weighted matching for a bipartite graph is computationallyeasy [ 156].
So, let Mbe a maximum weighted matching in the alignment graph A(N
1,N2).
An alignment of N1and N2is then given as follows: Any two nodes that are
connected by an edge that is contained in the matching Mform an aligned pair.
I na d d i t i o n ,e a c hp a i ro fl e a v e st h a ta r el a b e l e db yt h es a m et a x o nf o r ma na l i g n e dpair.Exercise 6.14.17 (Special case) In a rooted phylogenetic network N
1, assume that r
is a reticulate node that has exactly one child, v. Compare the path vectors µ(r)and
µ(v). What problem can arise for r and vin a matching-based alignment to some
other network N 2?H o wc a nt h ep r o b l e mb es o l v e d ?
T o illustrate the alignment of networks, consider the two rooted phylogeneticnetworks N
1and N2displayed in Figure 6.27. A maximum weighted matching M
inA(N1,N2) is achieved by pairing the internal nodes in the two networks in the
order that they occur when listed from top-left to bottom-right, as illustrated inFigure 6.31.

183 6.14 Comparing rooted networks
Chapter notes
This chapter contains many new results and a fair amount of unpublished material.T o the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to develop a theory ofclusters and rooted phylogenetic networks. We became aware of the importance ofdistinguishing between “softwired” and “hardwired” rooted phylogenetic networkswhile writing this chapter. The hardness of the cluster containment problem (andalso of the tree containment problem) for softwired networks suggests that simplyreporting a rooted phylogenetic network without further annotations may be toouninformative and thus additional information indicating how clusters or trees areembedded in the network may be useful (for example, see Figures 4.5and 4.6).



Part III
Algorithms and applications
In this third part of the book we present a wide range of algorithms that have beendeveloped for computing phylogenetic networks from biological data. For many ofthe methods, we brieﬂy describe an application and provide references to papersthat contain more details. The material is organized by type of input, which iseither splits (Chapter 7), clusters (Chapter 8), sequences (Chapter 9), distances
(Chapter 10), trees (Chapter 11) ,t r i p l e so rq u a r t e t s( C h a p t e r 12). Additionally, we
address the problem of drawing phylogenetic networks (Chapter 13)a n dg i v ea n
overview of some of the existing software for computing them (Chapter 14).



7
Phylogenetic networks from splits
In Chapter 5, we introduced splits and split networks and presented the Buneman
graph as the canonical split network associated with a given set of splits. Splitscan be computed from many different types of data, as we discuss in some of thefollowing chapters. The focus of this chapter is on the problem of computing a splitnetwork Nfor a given set of splits SonX. We present two different approaches.
The ﬁrst is the convex hull algorithm that computes the Buneman graph and can
be applied to any set of splits, using an exponential number of nodes and edges inthe worst case [11]. It is also used in Section 9.4to compute median networks. The
second is the circular network algorithm , which can be applied to any set of circular
splits and produces an outer-labeled planar network with only a quadratic number
of nodes and edges [ 62].
Both algorithms proceed in two steps. In the ﬁrst step, all trivial splits in S=
{S
1,...,S m}are processed to obtain a star network consisting of a central node
and one leaf per taxon. Then, in the second step, the remaining splits are insertedone by one so as to obtain the ﬁnal network.
T o avoid some technical complexities, in the following we will assume that Scon-
tains all ntrivial splits on X={x
1,..., xn}. We will use SO={SO
1,..., SO
n}and
SI={SI
1,..., SI
r}to denote the set of trivial (“o uter”) and non-trivial (“i nner”)
splits in S, with n+r=m.
7.1 The convex hull algorithm
In this section we present the convex hull algorithm for constructing a split net-
work. First we introduce the concept of the convex hull of a set of taxa in a splitnetwork:Deﬁnition 7.1.1 (Convex hull) LetSbe a set of splits on Xand let N =(V,E,σ,λ )
be a split network that represents S. Consider a set of taxa C ⊂X. The convex hull
H(C)of C in N is deﬁned as the set of all nodes in N that lie on a shortest path
187

188 Phylogenetic networks from splits
(a) Network N0 (b) Hulls for SI
1(c) Network N1 (d) Hulls for SI
2
(e) Network N2 (f) Hulls for SI
3(g) Network N3
Figure 7.1 Construction of the canonical split network for three non-trivial splits SI
1,SI
2and SI
3on
X={a,..., h}. (a) The split network N0representing all trivial splits on X.( b )T h et w o
convex hulls H(A1)and H(B1)for the split SI
1=A1
B1={a,b,c,d}
{e,f,g,h}(highlighted in dark gray
and light gray, respectively). The intersection H(A1)∩H(B1)consists of the central node.
(c) The resulting network N1obtained using the convex hull algorithm. (d) The two convex
hulls for SI
2=A2
B2={a,b,g,h}
{c,d,e,f}. (e) The resulting network N2. (f) The two convex hulls for
SI
3=A3
B3={a,c,f}
{b,d,e,g,h}. (g) The resulting network N3.
between any two nodes vandwthat are contained in λ(C), the set of all nodes labeled
by taxa in C.Examples can be found in Figure 7.1.
Exercise 7.1.2 (Alternative deﬁnition) Show that the above deﬁnition can be
rephrased as follows: the convex hull H (C)consists of all nodes in N that can be
reached from some node v∈λ(C)using only such edges that are labeled by splits
contained in the set {
A
B∈S|A∩C/negationslash=∅,B∩C/negationslash=∅ } .
Our aim is to construct a split network N=(V,E,σ,λ ) that represents the set of
splitsS=SO∪SI. T o accomplish this, we need to deﬁne the set of nodes V,s e t
of edges E, labeling of nodes by taxa λand the labeling of edges by splits σ.F i r s t ,
w ep r o c e s sa l lt h et r i v i a ls p l i t ss oa st oo b t a i nastar network with one central node
and one edge for each trivial split, as shown in Figure 7.1a:
Algorithm 7.1.3 (Star network for trivial splits) LetX={x1,..., xn}be a set of
taxa and let SO={SO
1,..., SO
n}be the set of all trivial splits on X,w i t hSO
i={xi}
X−{xi}
for i=1,...,n. We obtain a split network N 0representing SOas follows: Create a
new node v0.F o ri =1,..., nd o :

189 7.1 The convex hull algorithm
(i)Create a new node viand new edge e i={v0,vi}.
(ii)Setλ(xi)=viandσ(ei)=SO
i.
After constructing the initial star network, we add the non-trivial splits to thenetwork one by one, as follows. For each non-trivial split, compute the convex hullof each of the two split parts, determine and duplicate the intersection of the twohulls, one copy for each hull, and then insert new edges to connect the two copies.
More formally, we process the set of non-trivial splits S
Iby applying the follow-
ing algorithm to each split in SI={SI
1,SI
2,..., SI
r}in turn (see Figure 7.1b–g):
Algorithm 7.1.4 (Convex hull algorithm) LetSObe the set of all trivial splits on
Xand let SI
t={SI
1,SI
2,..., SI
t}be a set of t ≥0non-trivial splits on X. Assume
that we have already computed a split network N tforSO∪SI
t. To obtain a split
network for SO∪SI
t∪{SI
t+1}, where SI
t+1=A
Bis a new non-trivial split, modify N t
as follows:
(i)Compute the two convex hulls H (A)and H (B)in N tand let M be the split
graph induced in N tby the set of nodes H (A)∩H(B)/negationslash=∅.
(ii)Create a copy M/primeof M and for each node vand edge e in M let v/primeand e/primedenote
their copies in M/prime, respectively.
(iii) For every edge f that leads from some node u in H (B)−H(A)/negationslash=∅ to a node
vin M, redirect the edge f so that it leads from u to v/prime.
(iv) Connect each pair of nodes vin M and v/primein M/primeby a new edge f =(v,v/prime)and
setσ(f)=St+1.
The algorithm makes two assumptions that we should brieﬂy discuss. Let Nbe
a split network for a set of splits SonXand let S=A
Bbe a split of Xthat is
not contained in S.T h e n H(A)∩H(B)/negationslash=∅ must hold, as otherwise there would
already exist a set of edges in Nthat separates λ(A)f r o mλ( B) .T h i si su s e di ns t e p( i )
of the algorithm. Further, the assumption that Scontains all trivial splits of X
implies H(A)−H(B)/negationslash=∅ and H(B)−H(A)/negationslash=∅. This is used in step (iii) of
the algorithm.
In the worst case, H(A)∩H(B) will consist of all non-leaf nodes of Ntand then
Nt+1will have twice as many internal nodes as Nt. As this can happen for every
split that is processed by the algorithm, the number of nodes and edges in the ﬁnalsplit network can be exponential in the number of splits.
Note that the split network Nconstructed by this algorithm is uniquely deﬁned
and is the same as the one speciﬁed by the Buneman graph construction in Sec-tion 5.6. Although this is not easy to prove, we leave the proof as an exercise:
Exercise 7.1.5 (Convex hull algorithm computes Buneman graph) Prove that the
convex hull algorithm computes the Buneman graph.

190 Phylogenetic networks from splits
7.2 The circular network algorithm
An e t w o r k Nis called planar , if it can be drawn in the euclidean plane in such
a way that no two edges intersect. If a concrete drawing of Nis given, then we
r e f e rt ot h i sa sa plane network and, for brevity, also denote it by N.Atopological
embedding ofNis given by a mapping τthat assigns to each node v∈Van
ordering τ(v)=(v1,...,v k)o ft h es e to fa l li t sa d j a c e n tn o d e s {v1,...,v k}.
As above, assume that we are given a set of splits S=SO∪SI,w h e r e SO=
{SO
1,..., SO
n}is the set of all trivial splits on XandSI={SI
1,..., SI
r}is a set
of non-trivial splits. Additionally, we assume that Siscircular with respect to the
ordering ( x1,..., xn), as deﬁned in Section 5.7.
Our aim is to construct a planar split network Nthat represents S.T h i sc a n
be done using the circular network algorithm , which operates in a similar fashion
to the convex hull algorithm. Just as in that algorithm, the ﬁrst step is to obtaina star network with one central node and one edge for each trivial split usingAlgorithm 7.1.3 (see Figure 7.1a).
The main difference between the circular network algorithm and the convex hull
algorithm is in the choice of the subnetwork Mto be duplicated when processing
a non-trivial split: in the circular network algorithm, the subnetwork Mwill be a
single path along the outside of the existing network.
LetSbe a set of splits on Xand suppose we are given an outer-labeled planar
split network =(V,E,σ,λ ) forS, in which the taxa appear in the circular order
(x
1,..., xn) as one circles around the network in mathematically positive orien-
tation. For a new non-trivial split S={xp,...,xq}
X−{xp,...,xq}/∈S, with 1 <p<q≤n,w e
deﬁne M(xp,xq)t ob et h eu n i q u es h o r t e s tp a t hf r o m λ(xp)t oλ(xq) that runs
around the outside of the embedded network Nand is incident to every leaf edge
that is connected to a node labeled by one of the taxa in {xp,..., xq}.
The second step is to process the non-trivial splits one after the other (see
Figure 7.2). T o ensure that the resulting network has a minimal number of nodes and
edges, and possesses an embedding in the plane in which all edges correspondingto the same split can be drawn as parallel lines of the same length, the algorithmmust process the non-trivial splits in order of non-increasing cardinality of thesplit part that does not contain taxon x
1.
Algorithm 7.2.1 (Circular network algorithm) LetSObe the set of all trivial splits
onXand let SI
tbe a set of t ≥0non-trivial splits that is circular on (x1,..., xn).
Assume that we have already computed a split network N tforSO∪SI
tusing this
algorithm. To obtain a split network for SO∪SI
t∪{SI
t+1}, where SI
t+1={xp,...,xq}
X−{xp,...,xq}
is a new non-trivial split (obeying the ordering requirement formulated above), modify
Ntas follows:

191 7.2 The circular network algorithm
(a) Network N2 (b) Network N3
Figure 7.2 To add the splitA
B={a,f,g,h}
{b,c,d,e}to the split network N2shown in (a), with x1=a,x2=b,e t c . ,
the circular network algorithm duplicates the internal edges of the path M(b,e)leading
from the btoe(highlighted in gray) to obtain the network N3shown in (b), in which the
three edges representingA
Bare highlighted in bold.
(i)Determine the path M (xp,xq)and let ˙M denote the path obtained by removing
the ﬁrst and last (leaf) edges from M (xp,xq).
(ii)Create a copy ˙M/primeof˙Ma n df o re a c hn o d e vand edge e in ˙Ml e tv/primeand e/primedenote
their copies, respectively.
(iii) Redirect every edge f that leads from some node u =λ(xi)to some node vin˙M
so that it leads from u to v/prime,f o ra l li =p,..., q.
(iv) Connect each pair of nodes vin˙Ma n d v/primein˙M/primeby a new edge f =(v,v/prime)and
setσ(f)=St+1.
The number of nodes and edges produced by this algorithm is at most quadratic inthe number of splits m.T os e et h i s ,n o t et h a tt h ep a t h M(x
p,xq) in the algorithm
contains at most one edge per split and so processing of a single non-trivial splitproduces a linear number of edges.
Indeed, M(x
p,xq) cannot contain two edges corresponding to the same split
S/prime∈SI
tbecause this would imply that the split part of S/primethat does not contain x1
is smaller than the split part of SI
t+1that does not contain x1, which is impossible
due to the ordering in which the algorithm processes the splits. The requirementthat the non-trivial splits must be processed in order of non-increasing size of thesplit parts not containing x
1is not only important for minimizing the number
of edges in the network. If we disregard this requirement, then the resulting splitnetwork may fail to have the property that edges corresponding to the same splitcan be drawn as parallel line segments of the same length:Exercise 7.2.2 (Correct order is required) Consider the split network N
3shown in
Figure 7.2. Using the circular network algorithm, attempt to modify N 3so as to obtain
an e ws p l i tn e t w o r kN 4that also represents the split SI
4={a,h}
{b,c,d,e,f,g}as well. What
goes wrong? Rerun the algorithm on all four splits in the correct order.

192 Phylogenetic networks from splits
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 7.3 All four different split networks shown here represent the same set of splits. The split
networks shown in (a) and (b) were computed using the circular network algorithm pro-cessing the splits and taxa in two different orders. The one shown in (c) was constructedusing the convex hull algorithm. The split network shown in (d) can be obtained by deletingsuperfluous edges in any of the first three.
Unlike in the case of the convex hull algorithm, the split network constructed by thisalgorithm is not uniquely deﬁned, as the resulting network depends on the order inwhich the splits are processed. In Figure 7.3, we show four different representations
of the split set Sconsisting of all six trivial splits on X={a,..., f}and the three
non-trivial splits S
1={a,b,c}
{d,e,f},S2={b,c,d}
{e,f,a}and S3={c,d,e}
{f,a,b}.T h eﬁ r s tt w on e t w o r k s
were produced by the circular network algorithm and the third by the convex hullalgorithm. The fourth network can be obtained by the deletion of superﬂuous edgesin any of the ﬁrst three. This example also illustrates that the convex hull algorithmdoes not necessarily produce a planar network, even when given a circular set ofsplits.
Chapter notes
In many cases, direct application of the convex hull algorithm leads to an over-complicated network, as indicated in Figure 7.3. In practice, a useful heuristic is
to ﬁrst choose an order of the taxa such that a large subset of the given set ofsplits is circular. This subset of splits is then processed using the circular networkalgorithm to obtain an outer-labeled planar network. The remaining splits are thenprocessed using the convex hull algorithm, which will add some non-planar partsto the network. This is the default approach used in SplitsTree [ 125].
In the following chapters we describe a number of different methods for com-
puting a set of splits from sequences, distances, trees or quartets. All these methodsare used in conjunction with the convex hull and circular network algorithms toobtain a split network from biological data.

8
Phylogenetic networks from clusters
In this chapter, we present some methods for computing phylogenetic networksfrom clusters. Clusters, as opposed to splits, are inherently rooted and this explainswhy all methods presented in this chapter produce rooted phylogenetic networks.
We ﬁrst brieﬂy mention the cluster-popping algorithm for computing a clusternetwork, and then present a divide-and-conquer approach for computing rootedphylogenetic networks. Based on this, we discuss how to compute minimum galledtrees, galled networks and level- knetworks from clusters.
8.1 Cluster networks
In Chapter 6, we introduced the concept of a cluster network, which is a rooted
phylogenetic network that represents a set of clusters in the hardwired sense. Insuch a network, every tree edge represents exactly one cluster, which is deﬁned asthe set of taxa that label nodes below that edge. Given a set of clusters ConX,t h e
cluster network Nthat represents Ccan be efﬁciently computed using the cluster-
popping algorithm presented in Section 6.4. This algorithm is implemented in the
Dendroscope program and there it can be used to compute a cluster network fromthe set of clusters associated with a collection of rooted phylogenetic trees [ 121].
8.1.1 Application
A typical application of a cluster network is that one is given multiple rooted genetrees for a set of species and one would like to produce a network to illustrate theparts of the phylogeny upon which the trees agree and which parts are resolvedin different ways. For example, in [ 195] the evolutionary relationship between
human, chimpanzee and gorilla, together with orangutan and rhesus monkeyis investigated using genome-wide data, and strong support for three alternativerooted phylogenetic trees is reported in [ 65], see Figure 8.1a–c. The cluster network
Nthat represents all clusters contained in the three trees is shown in Figure 8.1d.
193

194 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
(a) 76% (b) 11% (c) 11% (d) Network N
Figure 8.1 Three rooted phylogenetic trees shown in (a), (b) and (c) supported by 76% ,11% and 11% ,
respectively, of all genes studied in [ 65]. In (d) we show the cluster network Ncomputed
on the three trees. The line width of each edge is proportional to the number of trees thatcontain it. Adapted from [ 121 ].
8.2 Divide-and-conquer using decomposition
As we argue in Section 6.10, decomposability is a desirable property to have and
thus it is sensible to restrict ones attention to such networks that exhibit the decom-position property when computing a rooted phylogenetic network Nto represent
a given set of clusters ConX. We now describe a divide-and-conquer strategy that is
based on the idea of decomposition and always produces a decomposable network.We use this approach later in the chapter to compute galled trees, galled networksand level-k networks from clusters.
Given a set of clusters ConXand a base method M that computes a rooted
phylogenetic network for a set of tangled clusters (as deﬁned below), the divide-
and-conquer approach has three steps:
(i) Determine the incompatibility graph IG(C).
(ii) For each non-trivial connected component C
/primeofIG(C), merge all taxa that
are not separated by C/primeand then compute a “local” phylogenetic network N/prime
forC/primeusing the given base method M.
(iii) Merge all the local phylogenetic networks to obtain a “global” network Nthat
represents the complete set of clusters C.
Let us look at this approach in more detail. The process is guided by a backbone
treethat is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 8.2.1 (Backbone tree) LetCbe a set of clusters on Xwith incompatibility
graph I G (C). The set of backbone clusters associated with Cis deﬁned as
B(C)={X(C/prime)|C/primeis a connected component of I G (C)}, (8.1)
whereX(C/prime)=∪ C∈C/primeC denotes the set of all taxa mentioned in C/prime. The backbone tree
forCis given by the unique rooted phylogenetic tree T (B(C))that represents B (C).
Note that this deﬁnition requires that the set of backbone clusters is compatible.

195 8.2 Divide-and-conquer using decomposition
Exercise 8.2.2 (Backbone clusters are compatible) LetCbe a set of clusters on X.
Prove that the set of backbone clusters B (C)is compatible.
LetCbe a set of clusters on X. The set of backbone clusters B(C) contains every
cluster CinCthat is compatible with all other clusters in C. Moreover, each non-
trivial connected component ZofIG(C) gives rise to a backbone cluster consisting
of all taxa that occur in the clusters contained in Z. A member of B(C) can also
arise in both ways, see, for example, the cluster {a,b,c,d}obtained from the
incompatibility graph shown in Figure 8.2b.
We refer to the set of clusters C/primeof a non-trivial connected component of
the incompatibility graph IG(C) (together with the set of contained taxa) as a
subproblem ofC, as it corresponds to a dataset that is dealt with in step (ii) of the
divide-and-conquer approach.
Before applying the given base method Mto a subproblem C/primeto obtain a rooted
phylogenetic network N/primefor the subproblem, we simplify the subproblem further
so as to fulﬁll the requirements of the following deﬁnition:Deﬁnition 8.2.3 (Tangled clusters) As e to fc l u s t e r s ConXis called tangled,i fi t
satisﬁes two conditions:
(C1) The incompatibility graph I G (C)is connected and has more than one node.
(C2) Every pair of taxa x and y in Xis separated by some cluster C in C.
A subproblem always fulﬁlls property (C1) by deﬁnition. T o ensure that (C2) holds,wecollapse a given subproblem ConXby merging any two taxa in Xthat are not
separated by a cluster in C. In more detail, each maximal set Aof taxa in Xthat
is not separated by Ci st r e a t e da sas i n g l e composite taxon
A.L e tXdenote the set
of all composite taxa obtained in this way. Clearly, each taxon in Xis contained
in some composite taxon in X. Each cluster CinCgives rise to a new cluster C
onX, which is deﬁned as C={A∈X|A⊆C}. In other words, Ccontains a
composite taxon Aif and only if the original cluster Ccontains the elements of the
original set A. We use Cto denote the set of all such collapsed clusters .
Here is a detailed description of the divide-and-conquer algorithm. The whole
process is illustrated in Figure 8.2.
Algorithm 8.2.4 (Divide-and-conquer) Assume that we are given a set of clusters
ConXand a base method M for computing a rooted phylogenetic for any tangled
set of clusters C/prime. The decomposition-based divide-and-conquer approach operates
as follows.
(i)Compute the incompatibility graph I G (C).
(ii)Compute the set of backbone clusters B (C)and the associated rooted backbone
tree T (B(C)), and initially set N =T(B(C)).

196 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
{a,b}
{a,b,c,d}
{b,c,d}
{c,d}
{e,f,g}
{f,g}
{f,g,h}{a,b,c,d}
{a,b}—{b ,c,d}
{c,d}
{e,f,g}—{ f,g,h}
{f,g}(c) Local network N1
(a) Clusters C (b)IG(C) (d) Local network N2
(e) Backbone T(B(C)) (f) Subproblems
(g) Merged network (h) Final network N
Figure 8.2 Details of the divide-and-conquer strategy. For the set of clusters Cshown in (a) we
show the corresponding incompatibility graph IG(C)in (b) (ignoring all trivial clusters).
For the two non-trivial connected components in C, namely C1={ { a,b},{b,c,d}}and
C2={ { e,f,g},{f,g,h}}, we show two corresponding rooted phylogenetic networks N1and
N2in (c) and (d), respectively. In (e), we illustrate the backbone tree T(B(C))forCwith all
internal nodes labeled by the corresponding taxon sets. The two subproblems for this treeare indicated as ovals in (f). In (g) we show how the two networks N
1and N2, obtained
using the cluster-popping algorithm, are inserted into the backbone tree. We show the finalrooted phylogenetic network Nin (h). Note that the edge zin (g) is contracted in (h)
because the cluster {e,f,g,h}represented by zis not a member of the original input set C.

197 8.2 Divide-and-conquer using decomposition
(iii) For each edge e =(u,v)in N that corresponds to a subproblem C/prime, with composite
taxon set X/prime, do the following:
(a)Collapse C/primetoC/primeand then compute a corresponding local rooted phylogenetic
network N/primeforC/primeonX/primeusing the base method M.
(b)Insert the local network N/primeinto N. This is done by detaching all children of
vin N, identifying vwith the root of N/primeand then reattaching each former
childwofvto that leaf /lscriptof N/primethat is labeled by a composite taxon A∈X/prime
such that L (w)⊆Ah o l d s .
(iv) Contract any tree edge in N that does not represent a cluster in C.
(v)Suppress all suppressible nodes.
A crucial property of the algorithm is that no two biconnected components aremerged when inserting a local network N
/primeinto the network N. This follows from the
fact that, for each node w, there exists exactly one leaf /lscriptthat fulﬁlls the requirement
posed in step (iiib) of the algorithm, which in turn is a direct consequence of thefollowing result:Lemma 8.2.5 (Insertion lemma) LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let T (B(C))
be the corresponding backbone tree. Consider two successive edges e
1=(u,v)and
e2=(v,w )in the backbone tree T(B(C)),a n dl e t C1andC2be the two subproblems
associated with these two edges, on taxon sets X1andX2, respectively. (Here we
consider C2to be a subproblem, even if it consists of only one cluster). If C 1is a cluster
inC1such that C 1∩X2/negationslash=∅ holds, then X2⊆C1.
Proof For the sake of contradiction, let us assume that the claim is false. Then
either there exists a cluster CinC1such that C⊂X2⊂X1holds, or there exists
a cluster C1inC1that is incompatible with X2. In the former case we can apply
Lemma 6.2.6, using X2as the separating cluster, to show that there must exist some
cluster C1inC1that is incompatible with X2, because otherwise the incompatibility
graph for C1cannot be connected. T o ﬁnish the ﬁrst case and to take care of the
second case, suppose that C1andX2are incompatible. There are three possibilities
to consider: (i) The intersection C1∩X2is a cluster in C2. (ii) There exists a
cluster C2inC2that is properly contained in C1∩X2. (iii) There exists a cluster
C2∈C2that is incompatible with C1∩X2. In the ﬁrst two cases, Lemma 6.2.6,
usingC1∩X2as the separating set, implies that the incompatibility graph IG(C2)
cannot be connected, a contradiction. In the third case, it follows that C1and C2
are incompatible, again a contradiction. /square
LetCbe a set of clusters on X. Any rooted phylogenetic network Ncom-
puted for Cusing the divide-and-conquer strategy has the decomposition
property:

198 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
Theorem 8.2.6 (Decomposability) LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let M be a
method for calculating a softwired network N/primefor any set of tangled clusters C’. If
N is a rooted phylogenetic network that was computed for Cusing Algorithm 8.2.4
with M as base method, then N has the decomposition property with respect to Cand
represents Cin the softwired sense.
Proof LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let Mbe a method for calculating a rooted
phylogenetic network to represent any given set of tangled clusters. Let Nbe a
rooted phylogenetic network computed using the divide-and-conquer algorithm.By Lemma 6.10.2,w eh a v et h a ta n yt w oc l u s t e r st h a ta r ec o n t a i n e di nt h es a m e
connected component of IG(C) are represented by edges that are contained in the
same biconnected component of N. By deﬁnition, only clusters contained in the
same component of IG(C) are considered together in a subproblem. On the other
hand, Lemma 8.2.5 ensures that the insertion step of the algorithm never merges
two distinct biconnected components into a larger biconnected component. Also,the ﬁnal step of contracting superﬂuous tree edges cannot merge any biconnectedcomponents. Hence, the resulting network Nhas the decomposition property.
Lemma 8.2.5 also implies the following: For any tree edge einNthat is present
in the original backbone tree Twe have that the set of leaves reachable from the
target node of einNis the same as in T. This implies that Nrepresents C.
/square
I ft h eb a s em e t h o d Mcan fail, such as in the case of the galled tree algorithm for
clusters described in Section 8.3, then the divide-and-conquer algorithm should be
modiﬁed to take such failures into account, for example by aborting the computa-tion and returning fail. If the base method Mcan return more than one possible
network for a given subproblem C
/prime, then the divide-and-conquer algorithm should
be modiﬁed so as to store the set of all solutions obtained for each subproblem.Moreover, the user should be provided with the possibility of inspecting the set ofsolutions for any given subproblem.Exercise 8.2.7 (Divide-and-conquer) Using the cluster-popping algorithm as the
base method M, apply the divide-and-conquer-approach to the following set of clusters:
/braceleftbig
{a,b,c,d,e},{b,c,d},{b,c,d,e,f,g},{c,d},{c,d,e},{f,g}/bracerightbig
.
8.3 Galled trees
In Chapter 6, we saw that unfortunately, in general, rooted phylogenetic networks
interpreted in the softwired sense are computationally hard to work with. Indeed,even just the Cluster Containment problem of determining whether a given rootedphylogenetic network Ncontains some given cluster ConX(in the softwired sense)
is NP-complete. T o avoid these computational problems, in this chapter we restrict

199 8.3 Galled trees
our attention to three topologically constrained classes of networks. In this sectionwe look at the computation of galled trees, as deﬁned in Section 6.11.1 and then, in
t h en e x ts e c t i o n ,w et u r nt og a l l e dn e t w o r k s ,a si n t r o d u c e di nS e c t i o n 6.11.3.F i n a l l y ,
we consider the computation of level- knetworks, as deﬁned in Section 6.11.2.
In the following we present an algorithm for computing a galled tree Nfor
a given set of clusters Cthat is tangled (if it exists). If the input cluster set Cis
not tangled, then one can ﬁrst use the divide-and-conquer approach describedin the previous section to decompose the problem of computing a galled tree forCinto a number of subproblems, each consisting of a set of tangled clusters C
/prime.
Each subproblem is then solved by the algorithm described below and the resultingnetworks are merged to obtain a galled tree Nfor the original input C(if it exists).
Assume that we are given a set of tangled clusters ConX. Our goal is to compute
an unrooted phylogenetic network Nthat represents Cand is topologically a galled
tree, if such a network exists. The following algorithm determines all possible galledtrees on C:
Algorithm 8.3.1 (Galled trees for tangled clusters) LetCbe a set of tangled clusters
onX. For each taxon r ∈Xsuch that C
/prime=C|X−{r}is compatible, construct a galled
tree N (that is not necessarily bicombining) in the following steps:
(i)Determine the rooted phylogenetic tree T that represents C/prime∪(X−{r})and let
λdenote the mapping of taxa in X−{r}onto the leaves of T.
(ii)Set N =T.
(iii) Create a new node u in N and set λ(r)=u.
(iv) For each edge e in N: let C/prime∈C/primebe the cluster represented by e. If C/prime∪{r}∈C
then mark e.
(v)For each lowest marked edge e: Insert a new node vinto e, create an edge from v
toλ(r).
(vi) Let h be the lowest stable ancestor of u and let P be the path of tree edges fromthe root ρto h. If there exists an edge in P that represents a cluster that does not
contain r , then let e be the ﬁrst such edge in P . Insert a new node winto e and
create a new edge from wto r .
If no such taxon r exists, then Ccannot be represented by a galled tree and the algorithm
reports fail. Otherwise, the auxiliary edge below the root (representing X−{r})i s
contracted and the constructed network N is a galled tree that represents C.
The algorithm is straightforward to understand, except, perhaps, for step (vi). Thisstep is required because, when representing a cluster by a tree edge e, for each
reticulate node uone in-edge must be on. The construction in step (vi) ensures
that this is always possible. The construction in step (vi), together with the fact thatthe tree constructed in step (i) contains an edge that represents the cluster X−{r},

200 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
{a}, {b}, {c}, {d}, {e}, {f}, {g},
{a,b}, {a,b,c}, {a,b,c,d,e},
{b,c}, {c,d,e}, {d,e}, {f,g}
(a) Set of input clusters C{a}{b}{c}{d}{e}{ f}{g}
{a,b}—{ b,c}—{ c,d,e}—{ a,b,c}
{a,b,c,d,e}{d,e}{ f,g}
(b) Incompatibility graph IG(C)
{a,b}—{ b,c}—{ c,d,e}—{ a,b,c}
(c) Non-trivial component{a,b}—{ b,c}—{ c,d}—{ a,b,c}
(d) Component after equating d={d, e}
(e) Rooted phylogenetic tree for
C {a,b,d}=C {a,b,c,d}−{c}(f) Galled tree for C {a,b,c,d}
(g) Galled tree for the complete set of clusters C
Figure 8.3 (a) A set of 14 input clusters C. (b) The corresponding incompatibility graph IG(C).( c )T h e
single non-trivial connected component of IG(C). (d) The incompatibility graph for C|{a,b,c,d},
obtained after equating d={d,e}, which is done because these two taxa are not separated
by any cluster in the component. Note that removal of cresults in a compatible set of
clusters C|{a,b,d}. (f) The rooted phylogenetic tree associated with C|{a,b,d}. (g) The galled tree
that represents C|{a,b,c,d}, obtained by attaching cto the previous tree. (i) The galled tree
that represents the complete set of clusters C.
also ensures that we can represent the cluster X−{r}, if required. The algorithm
is correct.Lemma 8.3.2 (Tangled clusters and galled trees) A set of tangled clusters ConX
can be represented by a galled tree N if and only if Algorithm 8.3.1 succeeds.
Proof LetCbe a set of tangled clusters on Xand assume that we have a galled
tree Nthat represents C. The algorithm is based on the fact that removal of the

201 8.4 Galled networks
one reticulate node ufrom Nalways results in a rooted phylogenetic tree Tfor
C/prime=C|X−{r},w h e r e uis the taxon that labels u. Because the algorithm tries all
possible choices for r, this conﬁguration will be considered and found. Note that
step (vi) is required because we need to be able to turn all edges leading to thereticulate node uoff when representing a cluster Cthat does not contain rby an
edge ethat lies above v. T o ensure that this can be done, we create a new reticulate
edge so as to move the lowest stable ancestor of uabove e.
/square
Any network Nobtained from Cby using the divide-and-conquer approach and
Algorithm 8.3.1 as a base method is a galled tree. This is because all local networks
are galled trees and merging the local networks to obtain Nd o e sn o ta f f e c tt h e
tree cycles present in them, by Lemma 8.2.5. Since Algorithm 8.3.1 computes all
possible galled trees on a tangled set of clusters, Lemma 6.11.3 ensures us that we
can use the divide-and-conquer approach to obtain the minimum galled tree on anot necessarily tangled set of clusters.
Algorithm 8.3.1 is formulated for galled trees that are not necessarily bicombin-
ing, that is, may contain reticulate nodes of indegree ≥3. However, as the algorithm
considers all possible multicombining rooted phylogenetic networks, in particular
it also considers all that are bicombining, too. Hence, the algorithm can be easilymodiﬁed so that it only outputs bicombining networks, or reports fail,i fn os u c h
network exists. We illustrate the computation of a galled tree for a set of clusters inFigure 8.3.
8.3.1 Application
Just like a cluster network (see Section 8.1), a galled tree can be computed from the
clusters of a set of rooted phylogenetic trees on Xso as to show which parts of a
phylogeny the trees agree upon and which parts are resolved in different ways.
For the three rooted phylogenetic trees reported in Figure 8.1,w es h o wag a l l e d
tree that represents all clusters contained in the trees in Figure 8.4. Note that this
network is simpler than the cluster network computed for the same data, which isshown in Figure 8.1d. This is because, as a softwired representation, a galled tree
generally uses fewer reticulations that a cluster network to represent the same setof clusters.
8.4 Galled networks
The concept of a galled network is introduced in Section 6.11.3 as a generalization
of galled trees. Recall that a rooted phylogenetic network NonXis said to be a
galled network , if every reticulation in Nhas a tree cycle.
LetCbe a set of clusters on X. The goal of this section is to provide an algorithm
for computing a galled network Nthat represents Cusing a minimum number of

202 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
Figure 8.4 A (multicombining) galled tree that represents all clusters contained in the three rooted
phylogenetic trees shown in Figure 8.1. The line width of each edge is proportional to the
number of trees that contain the cluster represented by it.
(possibly multicombining) reticulations. T o address this, we use the divide-and-conquer approach described in Section 8.2. In consequence, only such networks
that have the decomposition property are considered.
In the following, we describe an algorithm that computes a galled network Nthat
contains a minimum number of reticulate nodes for a given set of tangled clustersConX[131]. Note that the problem of ﬁnding such a minimum galled network
is NP-hard, and so it is not surprising that the algorithm that we present needsto solve two computationally hard problems. However, the practical performanceof this algorithm, as implemented in the program Dendroscope, is acceptable inmany cases.
The algorithm has two stages. First we must determine a minimum set of “retic-
ulate taxa” Rto remove from the taxon set Xsuch that the set of induced clusters
C
X−Ris compatible and can be represented by a rooted phylogenetic tree T.T h i s
is the maximal compatible subset problem, which we discuss next in Section 8.4.1.
Then we need to determine how to attach the associated set of reticulate nodesto the induced tree Tin the best possible way. This is the minimum attachment
problem, which we discuss later in Section 8.4.2.
8.4.1 Determining a minimum set of reticulations
The ﬁrst step in the computation of a galled network is to determine a minimumset of taxa whose removal results in a set of compatible clusters.Problem 8.4.1 (Maximal compatible subset) LetCbe a set of clusters on X. The
maximal compatible subset (MCS) problem is to remove a minimum set of taxa R
fromXso that the set of clusters C|
X−Rinduced by X−Ri sc o m p a t i b l e .
For a general set of clusters, this is known to be NP-hard, as already mentioned inSection 6.2.1. However, in the context of the divide-and-conquer strategy, we are
only interested in sets of clusters that are tangled. Is the MCS problem difﬁcult forthis restricted set of instances? The answer is yes [ 131].

203 8.4 Galled networks
Lemma 8.4.2 (MCS is hard for tangled clusters) LetCbe a set of clusters on Xwith
properties (C1) and (C2), see Deﬁnition (8.3.2). Solving the MCS problem is NP-hardfor such input.Proof We consider the decision problem of whether there exists a set of ktaxa
that “removes” the incompatibilities in a set of clusters, that is, whose removalresults in a set of induced clusters that are compatible. We then show by reductionof this decision problem for general cluster sets that the decision problem for aset of clusters with properties (C1) and (C2) is NP-complete, which implies theNP-hardness of the MCS problem for such input. Let Cbe a set of clusters on X,
not necessarily fulﬁlling properties (C1) and (C2). Set X
/prime=X∪{o},w h e r e ois
some new taxon not contained in X,a n dl e t C1denote the set of all trivial clusters,
that is, clusters that each contains only one taxon.
Deﬁne C/prime=(C−C1)∪{X}∪{{o,x}|x∈X}. Note that by construction, the
set of clusters C/primeonX/primehas properties (C1) and (C2). We prove that there is a
solution R/primeof size k+1 of the restricted problem for C/primeif and only if there is a
solution Rof size kof the general problem for C.
⇒:L e t R/primebe a solution of the restricted problem for C/primeof size k+1, there are
two cases to consider.
Case (1): o∈R/prime.T h e n R=R/prime−{o}is of size kand removes all the incompati-
bilities from C.
Case (2): o/∈R/prime. In this case, the set R/primemust contain all but one element of
X,t h a ti s ,| R/prime|=k+1=|X|−1, because otherwise C/prime|X/prime−R/primewould contain two
clusters of the form {o,x}and{o,y}, which are incompatible. Then any subset
R⊂Xof size |X|−2=kis a valid solution for C, because |C|−| R|=2a n da
collection of clusters on only two taxa cannot be incompatible.
⇐:L e t Rbe a solution of the general problem for Cof size k. We consider
R/prime=R∪{o}. This set has size k+1, removes all incompatibilities between clusters
{o,x}as it removes taxon o. All other incompatibilities are removed because
R⊂R/prime. /square
In the following we describe the seed-growing algorithm that addresses this
problem and often runs fast in practice [ 131]. For each pair of incompatible
clusters A,B∈Cwe deﬁne an incompatibility statement consisting of the three
terms ( A−B,A∩B,B−A), and we use
H={(h11,h12,h13),...,( hm1,hm2,hm3)} (8.2)
to denote the list of all such statements for C(see Figure 8.5a–b).
A set of taxa R⊂Xis said to resolve an incompatibility statement ( hi1,hi2,hi3)
if we have hi1⊆R,hi2⊆Rorhi3⊆R.T os o l v et h eM C Sp r o b l e m ,w em u s tﬁ n d
a minimum set of taxa R⊂Xthat resolves all incompatibility statements in H.

204 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
{d,e}
{e,f}
{f,g,h}
{d,e,f }
(a) Incompatibility
graph
({d},{e},{ f})
({e},{ f},{g,h })
({d,e},{ f},{g,h})
(b) Incompatibility
statementsseed size rank order
{d}1 1 1
{e}1 2 1
{f}1 4 1
{d,e}22
{d,f }22
{d,g,h}3 2
{e}1 3 2
{d,e}23
{e,f}23
{e,g,h}3 3
{f}1 5 2
{f}1 6 3
(c) Seeds
Figure 8.5 The four clusters occurring in the incompatibility graph indicated in (a) give rise to the three
incompatibility statements listed in (b). In (c) we list the seeds considered by the seed-growing algorithm. The column entitled “order” shows the order in which certain seeds arechosen as Rin the seed-growing algorithm. The algorithm halts after considering the sixth
seed and returns {f}as an optimal solution.
The algorithm maintains a list Sof candidate solutions called seeds . Each seed
R∈Sis assigned a rank ,d e n o t e db yr a n k ( R) ,w h i c hi sd e ﬁ n e da st h en u m b e ro f
incompatibility statements that it has been shown to resolve in succession, startingfrom the beginning of the list H.
Initially, the three parts of the ﬁrst incompatibility statement ( h
11,h12,h13)a r e
chosen as seeds and we set rank( h11)=rank( h12)=rank( h13)=1.
The algorithm then proceeds by repeatedly choosing among all seeds of min-
imum size a seed Rof maximal rank. If rank( R)=|H|,t h e n Ris an optimal
solution of the MCS problem and the algorithm halts. Otherwise, if Rresolves the
next incompatibility statement ( hj1,hj2,hj3), with j=rank( R)+1, then we set
rank( R)=j.O t h e r w i s e ,w er e p l a c e Rby three new seeds R1=R∪hj1,R2=R∪
hj2and R3=R∪hj3,w i t hr a n k ( R1)=rank( R2)=rank( R3)=rank( R)+1.
(See Figure 8.5c.)
Here is a more formal description of the algorithm:
Algorithm 8.4.3 (Seed-growing algorithm) Assume that we are given a set of
incompatibility statements H ={(h11,h12,h13),...,( hm1,hm2,hm3)}onX.T o
compute a minimum set of taxa R ⊂Xthat resolves all statements in H, do the
following:

205 8.4 Galled networks
Initialization:
Set S=∅
Setrank( h11)=rank( h12)=rank( h13)=1
Append h 11,h12and h 13to S
Main loop:repeat
Select R ∈S of minimum cardinality and then of maximum rank
ifrank( R)=kthen return R
Set i=rank( R)+1
ifRr e s o l v e s (h
i1,hi2,hi3)then Setrank( R)=i
else
Remove R from Sforj=1to3do
Set R
/prime=hij∪R, set rank( R/prime)=i and append R/primeto S
endBoth the correctness and the performance of the seed-growing algorithm can beanalyzed as follows [ 131]:
Lemma 8.4.4 (Correctness of the seed-growing algorithm) The seed-growing algo-
rithm solves the MCS problem.Proof Let R
∗be a minimum solution of the MCS problem. We will show by
induction that at the beginning of each iteration of the main loop the list S
contains at least one set R/primethat is a subset of R∗. This implies that the ﬁnal result
of the algorithm has the same cardinality as R∗.
T o start the induction, note that Sinitially contains all three parts of the ﬁrst
incompatibility statement, and one of these must be contained in R∗.
Now, assume that Scontains a subset R/primeofR∗at the beginning of a repeat of the
main loop. If R/primeis not selected as Rin the main loop, then R/primewill not be changed
during execution of the main loop and Swill still contain R/primeat the beginning of the
next iteration. The same is true if R/primeis chosen and resolves the next incompatibility
statement. Finally, if R/primeis chosen and does not resolve the next incompatibility
statement ( hi1,hi2,hi3), then the algorithm adds R/prime∪hi1,R/prime∪hi2and R/prime∪hi3
to the set of all seeds. Because the solution R∗must resolve this incompatibility
statement, too, one of these three unions will be contained in R∗. /square
Lemma 8.4.5 (Performance of the seed-growing algorithm) If a solution to the
maximal compatible subset problem has size k for a given set of incompatibilitystatements H, then the seed-growing algorithm will ﬁnd it by considering at most 3
k+1
seeds, and the algorithm has a worst-case time complexity of O (k|H|3k).

206 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
Proof Consider the enumeration tree of seeds generated by the algorithm. For the
purpose of this proof, let the level of a node vbe the number of edges in the path
from the root of the enumeration tree to v. At the beginning of an iteration, the
algorithm chooses a seed Rof minimum cardinality d. By construction, the level
of the corresponding node will be at most d.I fRsolves the next incompatibility,
then no new nodes are added to the enumeration tree. Otherwise, three new nodesare added, each representing some seed whose cardinality is strictly larger thanthat of R. Thus, the enumeration tree will have at most k+1 different levels, and
each level will have at most three times as many nodes as the previous level. Thisimplies that the number of seeds considered in Sis at most 3
k+1.M o r e o v e r ,e a c h
seed is considered at most |H|times. Finally, each seed has size at most kand so
processing of each seed can be done in O(k) steps. /square
8.4.2 Solving the minimum attachment problem
LetCbe a tangled set of clusters on Xand R/subsetnoteqlXa minimum subset of taxa such
that the restriction of CtoX−R,d e n o t e db yC |X−R,i sc o m p a t i b l e .L e t Tbe the
rooted phylogenetic tree on X−Rthat represents C|X−R∪(X−R), and let L(e)
denote the cluster in C|X−Rrepresented by an edge eofT.F o re a c he d g ee ofT,l e t
C(e)={C∈C|C−R=L(e)}denote the set of all clusters in Cthat are mapped
toL(e) under the restriction of CtoX−R,a n dl e t R(e)={r∈R∩C|C∈C(e)}
denote the set of all reticulate taxa that map to the cluster L(e). We refer to Tas
thetoppart (see Figure 8.6d).
LetC|Rdenote the restriction of Cto the taxon set Rand let ˆC|Rdenote the
set of all maximal clusters in C|R. We now deﬁne a graph Bassociated with ˆC|R,
as follows: each cluster C∈ˆC|Ris represented by a node v(C) and each taxon
r∈Ris represented by a node v(r) and we place an edge from v(C)t ov(r)
for all taxa rcontained in the cluster C.W er e f e rt o Bas the bottom part (see
Figure 8.6d).
Problem 8.4.6 (Attachment problem) The Attachment problem is to deﬁne a set of
link edges from nodes in the top part T to nodes in the bottom part B such that the
resulting graph is a galled network that represents the input set of clusters C.
More precisely, we aim at representing all clusters in C(e)b yt h ee d g ee inTand
all clusters in C|Rby the in-edges of the nodes of the form v(C), with C∈ˆC|R.T o
ensure this, the link set must fulﬁll the following properties:
(A1) For every edge eofTand every taxon r∈R(e) there exists a link from some
descendent node of einTto either v(r) or to some node of the form v(C)
inB,w h e r e C∈ˆC|Rcontains r.

207 8.4 Galled networks
Figure 8.6 (a) A set of clusters ConX={a,b,c,x,y}, (b) the incompatibility graph IG(C), (c) the
corresponding list Lof incompatibility statements solved by choosing {x,y}as the solution of
the MCS problem, and (d) a galled network Nobtained by solving the minimum attachment
problem. Here, the top and bottom parts of the network are labeled Tand B, respectively.
The edges of the top part are labeled by the non-trivial clusters that they represent and theleaves are labeled by their taxa. Link edges are shown as dashed lines.
(A2) For every node of the form v(C)i nB,w i t h C∈ˆC|R, there exists exactly one
link from some node in Ttov(C).
(A3) For every edge einTand r∈Rsuch that C(e) contains some C∈Cthat
does not contain r,t h e r ee x i s t sap a t hf r o ms o m en o d ei n T,t h a ti sn o ta
descendant of e,t ov (r).
Property (A1) ensures that we can reach v(r)f r o ma n ye d g e einTthat has a
cluster C∈C(e)t h a tc o n t a i n s r. Property (A2) ensures that all nodes of the form
v(C)i n Bhave indegree 1. We do not allow an indegree larger than 1 to ensure
that only nodes of the form v(r) for r∈Rwill be reticulate nodes. For example,
in Figure 8.6d, the highest node in Bis only attached to the node labeled b,a n d
not to the node labeled cor to the parent of the two nodes labeled cand d, and so
forth. Finally, property (A3) ensures that the node v(r)c a nb ea v o i d e df r o ma n y
edge einTthat must represent a cluster that does not contain r.

208 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
Our goal is to minimize the number of edges used to solve the Attachment
problem:Problem 8.4.7 (Minimum attachment problem) Find a collection of links that has
all properties (A1)–(A3) and is of minimum size.In general, this is hard to solve [ 131]:
Lemma 8.4.8 (Minimum attachment problem is hard) The decision problem
whether there exists a solution to the Attachment problem that uses at most k edges isNP-complete.Proof We sketch a reduction of the set cover problem to the minimum attachment
problem. In the NP-complete set cover problem we are given a collection of setsCon a set Xand a number k. The question is: does there exist a subset S⊆C
ofksets that covers X? We shall construct an instance of minimum attachment
problem that has a solution using m+kedges if and only if the set cover problem
has a solution using ksets, with m=|C|.L e t dbe an auxiliary taxon not contained
inXand deﬁne X
/prime=X∪{d}. We construct a phylogenetic tree Twith root ρ
and m+1l e a v e s .S e t R(e0)=X/primefor the ﬁrst leaf edge e0=(ρ,v 0)o f Tand
setR(ei)={d}for all other leaf edges e1=(ρ,v 1),..., em=(ρ,v m)o f T.T h i s
deﬁnes the top part of the graph used in the attachment problem. For the bottompart, B,d e ﬁ n eo n ecluster node v(C∪{d}) for each set C∈Cand one reticulate
nodev(r) for each r∈X
/prime. Place an edge from v(C∪{d})t ov(r) for each taxon
rcontained in C∪{d}. Note that we can assume that each r∈Xis contained
in at least two different sets in C, otherwise we can reduce the instance of the set
cover problem to a smaller one. This observation ensures that any solution to theminimum attachment problem fulﬁlls property (A3). We now prove the followingclaim: if there exists a solution of this instance of the minimum attachment problemusing m+kedges, then there is one in which the node v
0is only connected to
nodes of the form v(C∪{d}), with C∈C. It follows from properties (A1) and
(A2) that there are kedges that connect v0toBand medges that connect nodes
v1,...,v mtoB. Since all edges departing from v0lead to cluster nodes in B,t h e n
this set of cluster nodes deﬁnes a subset of clusters Sthat covers X/prime, and thus, also
X, providing a solution to the set cover problem of size k.N o w ,t op r o v et h ec l a i m ,
assume one of the edges departing from v0leads directly to a node of the form v(r)
inB, for some taxon r∈X/prime. If there is a cluster node v(C∪{d}) connected to v0
with x∈C∪{d},t h e nw ec a nr e m o v et h ee d g ef r o m v0tov(r), as it is superﬂuous.
Otherwise, there exists such a cluster node v(C∪{d}) that is attached below some
nodeviinT,w i t h i>0. In this case, we modify the solution as follows: redirect
t h ee d g ef r o mv 0tov(r)s ot h a ti tl e a d st ov (C∪{d}) and redirect the edge from vi

209 8.4 Galled networks
tov(C∪{d})s ot h a ti tl e a d st o v(r). This is repeated until all children of v0are
cluster nodes.
Vice versa, it also not difﬁcult to see that any solution with ksets of an instance
of the set cover problem leads to a solution with m+kedges of this simpliﬁed case
of the minimum attachment problem. /square
The instances of this problem that are of interest in practice are often quite small,
in which case a branch-and-bound approach can be adequate. The above reduc-tion also proves that the minimum attachment problem is W[2]-hard, remain-ing intractable even when parameterized by k, and so it is unlikely that an
O(f(k)×poly (n)) algorithm can be obtained. Alternatively, the problem can
be posed as an ILP (Integer Linear Program) with binary variables that determinewhether a possible link edge is used or not and inequalities that ensure that theproperties (A1)–(A3) hold. The optimization goal is then to minimize the sum ofthe binary variables.
As in the computation of galled trees, the following complication must also
be taken into account: After solving the minimum attachment problem for a setof clusters ConXand a given reticulation set R, there may exist a tree edge
e=(v
e,w e) along the path from the root of the top part Tto a node v(r),
with r∈R, that is supposed to represent a cluster Cthat does not contain r.
Assume that eis the highest such edge. If elies above the lowest single ancestor
ofv(r), then an additional reticulate edge into v(r) is required that joins some
node above etov(r), so that Ccan be represented by e. T o this end, we create
an e we d g ef r o mv etov(r). (This modiﬁcation can also be used to represent
the cluster X−R, because the tree Tis deﬁned so as to contain an edge that
represents X−R.)
Any network Nobtained from Cby using the divide-and-conquer approach
and the algorithm presented in this section to solve the subproblems is a gallednetwork. This is because all local networks are galled networks and merging thelocal networks to obtain Ndoes not affect the tree cycles present in them, by
Lemma 8.2.5.
8.4.3 Application
As in the case of cluster networks and galled trees, one possible use of a gallednetwork is to summarize a set of different rooted phylogenetic trees. In Figure 8.7,
we show the use of a galled network in the context of resolving the phylogenyofTriticeae, a tribe of grasses for which single-copy gene studies have failed to
reconstruct a reliable phylogeny. In [ 69], the analysis of phylogenetic trees for 27
different genes identiﬁes several well-supported clades.

210 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
Taeniatherum_caput-medusaeTriticum_monococcumAegilops_speltoides
Aegilops_longissima
Aegilops_tauschii
Secale_cereale
Heteranthelium_piliferum
Dasypyrum_villosum
Agropyron_mongolicu m
Eremopyrum_triticeum
Australopyrum_retrofractu m
Henrardia_persica
Eremopyrum_bonepartisPseudoroegneria_libanotica
Pseudoroegneria_spicata
Hordeum_vulgare
Hordeum_bogdanii
Hordeum_marinum
Psathyrostachys_juncea
Brachypodium_sp.
Brachypodium_dystachion
Zea_mays
Oryza_sativa
k r o w t e n d e l l a G ) b ( k r o w t e n r e t s u l C ) a (
Figure 8.7 A cluster network (a) and galled network (b), computed for a set of clusters obtained from
27gene trees on Triticeae [69].
In Figure 8.7we show both a cluster network and a minimum galled network that
represents all clusters contained in the 27 gene trees, extracted after preprocessingthe trees so as to reduce incompatibilities among them, as described in [ 212]. Both
networks show that the modiﬁed trees are are still in conﬂict, but also that theyagree on several clades. The galled network provides a slightly clearer picture of theconﬂicts than the cluster network.
8.5 Level- knetworks
LetCbe a set of tangled clusters on X. In this section, we describe an algorithm
for computing a level- knetwork (as deﬁned in Section 6.11.2) that represents C
for a given value of k, if such a network exists. Used as the base method for the
divide-and-conquer approach introduced in Section 8.2,t h i sa l l o w su st oc o m p u t e
a decomposable level- knetwork for an unrestricted set of clusters C, as described
below.
Informally, the algorithm operates as follows. If k=0, then it simply returns the
tree that represents C, if such a tree exists. If k>0, then for each taxon xinX,t h e
algorithm ﬁrst removes xfromC. The set of clusters C/prime=CX−{x}is then collapsed
(as described on page 195) so as to obtain a set of collapsed clusters C/prime/primeon a set
of composite taxa X/prime/prime. Next, the set of level-( k−1) networks that represent C/prime/primeis
recursively computed. For each network N/prime/primefound, a level-( k−1) network N/primethat
represents C/primeis obtained by decollapsing all composite taxa in N/prime/prime. Finally, for each
pair of edges in N/prime, the algorithm determines whether placing a reticulation below

211 8.5 Level- knetworks
Figure 8.8 (a) A tangled set of eight clusters C.( b )T h es e t C/primeobtained from Cby removing the taxon
cand then all trivial clusters. (c) The set of clusters C/prime/primeobtained by collapsing C/prime. The only
non-trivial composite taxon is {b,f}.( d )T h es e tC/prime/primeafter the removal of {b,f}. (e) The
rooted phylogenetic tree for the clusters in (d) with an auxiliary edge inserted above theroot. (f) A level-1 network for the set of clusters in C
/prime/prime(together with all trivial clusters). This
network is obtained from (e) by adding a reticulate node connecting the two bold edges in(e), with a pendant leaf labeled by the composite taxon {b,f}. (g) A level- 1network for the
set of clusters in C
/prime. This network is obtained from (f) by replacing the composite leaf {b,f}
by the rooted phylogenetic tree that represents {b,f}. (h) A level- 2network for the set C.
This network is obtained from (g) by adding a reticulate node below the two bold edgesin (g), with a pendant leaf labeled by taxon c. The auxiliary edge below the root has been
removed.
the two edges, together with a pendent leaf labeled by x, results in a level-k network
Nthat represents C. We illustrate the computation of a level-2 network for a set of
tangled clusters in Figure 8.8.
During this process, we also need to be able to add a reticulation to the network
that does not have a taxon directly beneath it, as discussed further below with the

212 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
{a,b},{a,e},{b,e},
{c,d},{c,e},{d,e},
{a,b,e},{c,d,e}
(a) Tangled clusters (b) Level-3 network with (c) Final level-3 network
two auxiliary taxa
Figure 8.9 (a) A tangled set of clusters C. (b) A corresponding level- 3network recursively constructed
by Algorithm 8.5.1, using x=e(for k=3),x=z(for k=2)a n d x=z/prime(for k=1) in line 9
of the algorithm. (c) The final level- 3network NforC, obtained from the previous one by
removal of the two nodes labeled by auxiliary taxa, the auxiliary edge below the root andcontracting all edges connecting two reticulate nodes.
help of Figure 8.9. T o this end, in the main loop of the algorithm (line 9) we also
consider the case of adding a new auxiliary taxon zthat does not belong to X.H e r e
is a more detailed description of the so-called Cass algorithm [136 ]:
Algorithm 8.5.1 (Level-k networks for tangled clusters) Let k≥0be a ﬁxed num-
ber. Input is a set of clusters ConX, which is assumed to be tangled in the initial call to
the algorithm. Recursively construct a set of level-k networks N for Cin the following
steps (if any such network exists):SetN=∅
ifk=0then
ifCis compatible then
Compute the rooted phylogenetic tree T for C(and all trivial clusters on X)
5 Insert an auxiliary edge that separates the root from the rest of the tree TSetN={T}
else (comment: k >0)
Create a new auxiliary taxon z
9for each taxon x ∈X∪{z}do
SetC/prime=C|X−{x}, remove all trivial clusters and then collapse to obtain C/prime/prime
onX/prime/prime
Recursively compute the set N/prime/primeof level-(k −1)n e t w o r k sf o rC/prime/primeonX/prime/prime
for each network N/prime/primeinN/prime/primedo
Replace each leaf of N/prime/prime, which is labeled by a composite taxon ¯A∈X/prime/prime,
b yt h er o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e eT (C/prime|A)that represents C/prime|A
Let N/primebe the resulting network

213 8.5 Level- knetworks
for each pair of (not necessarily distinct) edges e 1and e 2in a new copy
of N/primedo
Create two nodes r and u, add an edge from r to u and set λ(x)=u
Insert a new node v1into e 1and connect v1to r
Insert a new node v2into e 2and connect v2to r
ifthe resulting network N represents C(disregarding all auxiliary taxa)
then add N to N
return N
If the returned set Nis empty, then the algorithm reports fail.
If there exists a level- knetwork that represents C, then this algorithm is guaranteed
to ﬁnd such a network, if k≤2[136] .F o rl a r g e rv a l u e so f k, it is unknown whether
failure to ﬁnd a level- knetwork by the algorithm always implies that no such
network exists. Hence, for k>2, this algorithm is a heuristic for ﬁnding a level-k
network.
If the initial call to the algorithm is successful and returns a non-empty set of
rooted phylogenetic networks Nthen, in a post-processing step, in each level- k
network N∈Nreturned by the algorithm, the auxiliary edge below the root is
contracted. In addition, any edge that connects two reticulate nodes is contracted.Moreover, each leaf labeled by an auxiliary taxon is removed. After these modiﬁca-tions, every network NinNis a level-k network that represents C.
The reason why we contract every edge that connects two reticulate nodes above
is that such an edge contributes toward a resolution of an otherwise multicombiningnode in a way that is not explicitly supported by the input data (see Figure 8.9).
The role of the auxiliary edge inserted below the root node of the tree Tin
line 5 of the algorithm is to allow the case that a particular taxon xis completely
avoided in the network as required in the representation of certain clusters. (Asimilar construction is also used in the computation of a galled tree and of a gallednetwork, as discussed above.)
The role of the auxiliary taxa created in line 8 and considered in line 9 of
the algorithm is to facilitate the computation of level- knetworks for Cthat have
nested reticulations. T o discuss this, consider the set of tangled clusters Cshown
in Figure 8.9a. A level-3 network that represents this set of clusters is shown in
Figure 8.9c. T o generate this network using Algorithm 8.5.1, in the initial call to the
algorithm (with k=3), in line 9 we choose x=e, then in the ﬁrst recursive call
(with k=2), we choose x=zand then, in the second recursive call (with k=1),
we choose x=z
/prime. In the ﬁnal recursive call (with k=0), the tree Ton the taxon
set{a,b,c,d}is built and returned. In Figure 8.9b we indicate the positions of the
auxiliary taxa zand z/primein the constructed network.

214 Phylogenetic networks from clusters
This example also shows that the algorithm really must recurse ktimes before
checking whether Cis compatible and then building the tree, because, in this
e x a m p l e ,w eﬁ r s tr e m o v e eand from then on, all considered clusters are compatible.
The insertion of auxiliary taxa during the algorithm is actually slightly more
complicated than described above. Assume that we are running the algorithm forsome value of k. When making a recursive call to the algorithm for k−1, there
really are two different cases that must be distinguished, as follows. The ﬁrst case isthat in the recursive call, we intend to only consider values of xthat are contained
in the taxon set X, in line 9 of the algorithm. In this case, the algorithm proceeds
exactly as described above. The other case is that we intend to consider x=z,
where zis a new auxiliary taxon, in the recursive call. In this case, the algorithm
proceeds in a slightly modiﬁed manner, namely we refrain from collapsing the setC
/primein line 10 of the algorithm before making the recursive call. The reason for this
change is that when adding an auxiliary taxon to the network we need to haveaccess to the edges associated with the uncollapsed network, as otherwise certainnetworks will be missed.
LetCbe a set of clusters on Xand let K>0 be a ﬁxed number. In prac-
tice, the Cass algorithm is used together with the divide-and-conquer algorithm(Algorithm 8.2.4) as follows. For each of the subproblems C
/primeconsidered in the
divide-and-conquer algorithm, we ﬁrst call the Cass algorithm with k=1. If the
algorithm reports fail, we then run it with k=2, etc. We repeat this until either
we have successfully computed a level- knetwork for some value of k≤K,o rw e
assume that no such network exists.
In this way, we seek to compute a rooted phylogenetic network Nthat minimizes
the number of reticulations among all rooted phylogenetic networks that representCand have the decomposition property. If the number of reticulations found for
each subproblem is either 1 or 2, then by the result mentioned above, the network
Nis indeed guaranteed to be minimal in this sense. For higher values of k,t h e n ,
this may not be the case.Exercise 8.5.2 (Level-2 network) Using the Cass algorithm with k =2as the base
method M, apply the divide-and-conquer-approach to the following set of clusters(together with all trivial clusters):
/braceleftbig
{a,b},{b,c},{d,e},{f,g},{d,f},{e,g},{h,i},{a,b,c},{d,e,f},
{e,f,g},{d,e,f,g},{a,b,c,d,e,f,g},{d,e,f,g,h,i}/bracerightbig
.
Finally, as an example of a level- knetwork, consider the galled network depicted in
Figure 8.7b. This is a level-2 network. Note that it contains a multicombining node
of indegree 3, which arises from two bicombining reticulations by contracting the

215 8.5 Level- knetworks
edge between them, and thus may be counted as two reticulations, as discussed inSection 6.11.2.
Chapter notes
The algorithms presented in this chapter are all very new. However, easy-to-useimplementations of them are available in the Dendroscope program (see Sec-tion 14.4) and it remains to be seen whether they will be widely used by biologists
in practical studies.
A comparison of the galled network method and the Cass algorithm for level- k
networks shows that the former usually runs very much faster that the latter, whilethe latter often obtains a network with fewer reticulations [ 136].

9
Phylogenetic networks from sequences
In this chapter we describe a number of methods that require sequences, or moreprecisely, a multiple sequence alignment, as input. T o this end, we ﬁrst introducethe useful concept of a condensed alignment and brieﬂy discuss the relationshipbetween binary sequences and splits. We then discuss a number of methods that canbe used to compute unrooted phylogenetic networks from sequences, includingthe median network, quasi-median network and median-joining methods. Finally,we look at two different ways of computing rooted networks from sequences, bothaimed at explaining differences in terms of mutations and recombinations.
9.1 Condensed alignments
For computational reasons, it is sometimes useful to assume that a given multiplesequence alignment MonXiscondensed in the sense that no two sequences are
identical and no two columns display the same pattern of states, that is, induce the
same partitioning of the taxa. Additionally, we assume that a condensed alignmentdoes not contain any constant columns (in which all sequences have the same state).We shall sometimes refer to the sequences of a condensed alignment as haplotypes .
If the original input multiple sequence alignment M
0is not condensed, then
we will usually condense it in a preprocessing step as follows: ﬁrst, each set of
identical sequences is pooled into a single haplotype, then all constant columns areremoved and, ﬁnally, every set of columns that have the same pattern is replaced byas i n g l ec o l u m n ithat is assigned a weight ω(i) that equals the number of columns
in the represented set. Also, in some applications, one may want to consider thehaplotypes as weighted by the number of original sequences that they represent.An example is shown in Figure 9.1.
9.2 Binary sequences and splits
Some of the algorithms discussed in this chapter assume that the input consists of amultiple alignment Mofbinary sequences on X. However, in practice, the original
216

217 9.2 Binary sequences and splits
12345
aAAGTT
bCACAT
cCACAA
dTATCA
eAAGTT12
aAA
bBA
cBB
dCB
(a) Alignment M0 (b) Condensed M
Figure 9.1 In the multiple alignment of DNA sequences M0shown in (a), the columns 1,3and 4have
the same pattern and column 2is constant. The sequences for aand eare identical. (b) The
resulting condensed alignment Mcontains four sequences of length two. The sequence for
arepresents the sequences for both aand ein the original alignment and has weight 2.T h e
first column represents the three original columns 1,3and 4and has weight ω(1)=3.T h e
second column corresponds to the fifth original column and has weight ω(2)=1.
input data will usually be a multiple alignment of DNA sequences M0onX.I nt h i s
section, we assume that the given multiple sequence alignment does not containany gaps. This assumption can be met by ignoring all columns that contain a gap.
There are a number of different ways that such data can be converted into
binary sequences. One possibility is to extract all those columns in M
0that contain
precisely two different character states and then to replace the two character statesby
0and1, perhaps in such a way that the ﬁrst sequence is always given the state 0,
say. A justiﬁcation for discarding all columns that contain more than two charactersstates could be that such sites are “hypervariable” and so may fail to be homologousor may have been saturated by multiple substitutions [ 46].
Another possibility is to use all columns of M
0and to replace any occurrence of
either of the two nucleotides AandG(the two purines) by 0, and to replace any
occurrence of the other two nucleotides CandT(the two pyrimidines) by 1.T h i s
approach is based on the observation that transitions (changes between AandGor
between CandT) are more frequent than transversions (all other possible changes)
and the latter are more informative.
IfMis a multiple alignment of binary sequences on X, then each non-constant
column iofMcorresponds to a split S=A
BofX. It is deﬁned by setting Aequal
to the set of all taxa whose state in column iagrees with that of the ﬁrst sequence
and setting B=X−A.I fMis a condensed alignment, then the split Sis unique
and it is assigned a weight ω(S)=ω(i) that equals the number of original columns
that were condensed into the column i. We use S(M) to denote the set of all splits
obtainable in this way.
The columns of a multiple sequence alignment MonXare also called characters
orpositions. We say that two characters or positions of a multiple alignment of
binary sequences are compatible if and only if the corresponding splits are, and
incompatible otherwise.

218 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
Exercise 9.2.1 (Incompatibility of binary characters) Show that two characters i
and j in a multiple alignment M of binary sequences are incompatible if and only ifthere exist four different sequences in the alignment that equal
00,01,10and11,
when restricted to the characters i and j .
9.3 Parsimony splits
The split decomposition algorithm discussed in Section 5.9.4 t a k e sa si n p u ta
distance matrix DonXand produces as output a set of weakly compatible splits S
onX. A main feature of the algorithm is that it employs a distance-based “isolation
index” that evaluates to a positive number for, at most, two of the three possiblenon-trivial splits on any quadruple Qof taxa in X.
LetMbe a multiple sequence alignment on X. T o obtain a similar algorithm
that operates on a multiple sequence alignment rather than on a distance matrix,we must replace the computation of the isolation index (which requires a distancematrix) by an analogous calculation that is based directly on the alignment.
In the parsimony splits method [ 8], the basic idea is to use an index that selects,
at most, two of the three most parsimonious bifurcating tree topologies for anygiven quadruple, as the name suggests. In more detail, for each quadruple oftaxa Q={w,x,y,z}onXwith corresponding aligned sequences a=a
1...aL,
b=b1...bL,c=c1...cLand d=d1...dLinM,w ed e ﬁ n e
pM/parenleftbigg{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbigg
=| { i:ai=biand ci=di}| (9.1)
as the number of positions i∈{1,..., L}in the alignment Mat which the character
states are the same for the sequences aandband also for candd, but not necessarily
for all four sequences.
T o set things up so for any quadruple of taxa Q={w,x,y,z}, we select the
quartet topology{w,x}
{y,z}if and only if
pM/parenleftbigg{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbigg
>min/parenleftbigg
pM/parenleftbigg{w,y}
{x,z}/parenrightbigg
,pM/parenleftbigg{w,z}
{x,y}/parenrightbigg/parenrightbigg
. (9.2)
As this condition is a proper inequality, at most two quartet topologies are chosenfor any given quadruple of taxa.
T o obtain a set of splits that induce only the selected quartet topologies, we deﬁne
theparsimony index of a split S=
A
Bas
pM(S)=min
w,x∈A
y,z∈B/parenleftbigg
pM/parenleftbigg{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbigg
−min/parenleftbigg
pM/parenleftbigg{w,x}
{y,z}/parenrightbigg
,
pM/parenleftbigg{w,y}
{x,z}/parenrightbigg
,pM/parenleftbigg{w,z}
{x,y}/parenrightbigg/parenrightbigg/parenrightbigg
≥0. (9.3)

219 9.4 Median networks
A split Sis called a p-split , if its parsimony index pM(S) is positive. The set of all p-
splits associated with Mis weakly compatible by Lemma 5.9.4. It can be computed
using a simple modiﬁcation of the split decomposition algorithm as follows:Algorithm 9.3.1 (Parsimony splits) Given a multiple sequence alignment M on
X={x
1,..., xn}, compute the set of all p-splits on Xas follows:
Initially, set X1={x1}andS1=∅. Now, assume that we have computed the set
of all p-splits Sion the ﬁrst i taxa Xi={x1,..., xi}.T oo b t a i nS i+1onXi+1=
{x1,..., xi+1},f o re a c hs p l i tA |B∈Sido:
(i)If p M/parenleftBig
A∪{xi+1}
B/parenrightBig
>0,t h e na d dA∪{xi+1}
BtoSi+1.
(ii)If p M/parenleftBig
A
B∪{xi+1}/parenrightBig
>0,t h e na d dA
B∪{xi+1}toSi+1.
(iii) If p M/parenleftBig
Xi
{xi+1}/parenrightBig
>0,t h e na d dXi
{xi+1}toSi+1.
The result is given by Sn.
The splits computed by the algorithm are then usually processed by a method sucha st h ec o n v e xh u l la l g o r i t h m( s e eS e c t i o n 7.1) to produce a split network.
9.3.1 Application
The parsimony-splits method has not been used much in the literature, probably
because the resulting set of splits is usually very similar to the one obtained by themore widely known split-decomposition method. An example of the applicationof the method can be found in a study that compares the phylogeny of differentHox clusters in sharks and mammals [ 200]. The parsimony-splits algorithm is used
together with a number of other phylogenetic methods to support the hypothesisthat the shark HoxN cluster is orthologous to the mammalian HoxD cluster.
9.4 Median networks
Median networks were developed as a means of visualizing the variation in mito-chondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences in the study of human evolution [11 ]. They are
usually constructed for closely related sequences that have evolved without recom-binations. In a median network N, every sequence of a given multiple sequence
alignment MonXis represented by a node and additional nodes are said to repre-
sent further unobserved sequences. Two nodes are connected by an edge if and only
if they differ by exactly one mutation (under the assumption that the alignment iscondensed).
In more detail, assume that we are given a multiple alignment of DNA sequences
M
0onX. As we shall see, the median network algorithm works only for binary
sequences. Thus, the ﬁrst step is to convert the original input data into a condensed

220 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
a=01010
b=10001
c=11100
m(a,b,c)=11000
(a) Median calculation (b) Parsimonious tree
Figure 9.2 (a) The median m(a,b,c)of three binary sequences a,band c. The median m(a,b,c)
minimizes the parsimony score of the unrooted phylogenetic tree on {a,b,c}shown in (b),
which in this case is five.
multiple alignment of binary sequences MonX, as described in Section 9.2.R e c a l l
that condensed means that no two columns of Mexhibit the same pattern, there
are no constant columns and no two taxa have the same sequence.
Consider three binary sequences a=a1a2...aL,b=b1b2...bLand c=
c1c2...cL.W ed e ﬁ n et h e i rmedian as the sequence m(a,b,c)w h o s e i-th char-
acter state is the majority state of ai,biand ci,w h i c hi s1 ,i f ai+bi+ci≥2a n d
0, else. An example is shown in Figure 9.2a.
The median sequence µ=m(a,b,c) has the property that it minimizes the sum
of pairwise Hamming distances (see Section 3.12) H(a,µ)+H(b,µ)+H(c,µ)
and provides a most parsimonious sequence for the internal node of the unrootedphylogenetic tree on {a,b,c}, as illustrated in Figure 9.2b.
LetMbe a multiple alignment of binary sequences on X.T h e median closure of
Mis deﬁned as the set ¯Mof all binary sequences that can be obtained by repeatedly
taking the median of any three sequences in the set and adding it to the set, untilno new sequences can be produced. The median network is deﬁned as follows:Deﬁnition 9.4.1 (Median network) Let M be a condensed multiple alignment of
binary sequences on X. The median network associated with M is a phylogenetic
network N =(V,E,σ,λ )whose node set is given by the median closure V =¯Ma n d
in which any two nodes a and b are connected by an edge e of color σ(e)=ii nE ,
if any only if they differ exactly in their i-th position (as haplotypes). An associatedtaxon labeling λ:X→V maps each taxon x onto the node λ(x)that represents the
corresponding sequence.An example of a median network is shown in Figure 9.3.
LetMbe a condensed multiple alignment of binary sequences on X.D e ﬁ n i -
tion 9.4.1 suggests the following naive algorithm for computing the median network
NforM: First compute the median closure ¯M. Then construct the graph Nthat
has node set ¯Mand in which any two nodes are connected by an edge eof color
σ(e)=iif any only if they differ exactly in their i-th position (as haplotypes).
Alternatively, one can compute the canonical split network N(S(M)) for the set

221 9.4 Median networks
a0000000
b0110000
c1101100
d1110110
e0110101
(a) Alignment M (b) Median network N
Figure 9.3 (a) A condensed multiple alignment Mof binary sequences on X={a,..., e}.( b )T h e
median network Nthat represents M. The nodes are labeled by haplotypes and the edges
are labeled by the corresponding columns in M.
of splits S(M) associated with Musing the convex hull algorithm, based on the
following result [6]:Theorem 9.4.2 (Median network is split network) Let M be a condensed multiple
alignment of binary sequences on X. The naive median network algorithm and the
convex hull algorithm both produce the same network.An important consequence of this result is the following:Corollary 9.4.3 (Median network is connected) Let M be a condensed multiple
alignment of binary sequences on X. The median network N associated with M is
connected.LetMbe a condensed multiple alignment of binary sequences on X.I fa l lp a i r s
of columns in Mare compatible, it follows from Theorem 9.4.2 that the resulting
median network will be a phylogenetic tree T.T r i v i a l l y ,t h i st r e ew i l lb et h em o s t
parsimonious tree for M(see Section 3.7). More generally we have the following
result [ 11]:
Theorem 9.4.4 (All most parsimonious trees) Let M be a condensed multiple
alignment of binary sequences on X. The median network N associated with M
contains all phylogenetic trees T on Xwhose parsimony score P S (T,M)is minimum.
9.4.1 Reduced median networks
The main application of a median network is to provide a useful visualization ofprobable evolutionary pathways. Unfortunately, a median network can have a very

222 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 9.4 (a) A median network restricted to two incompatible binary characters, where the weight
of the first character is much higher than the weight of the second one. In (b) and (c)we show the two possible ways of resolving the incompatibility by postulating two parallelchanges of the second character. We choose the reduction shown in (b), if the two lowersequences occur in the given multiple sequence alignment more frequently that the twoupper ones, and we choose the reduction shown in (c) otherwise. (d) The resolutionindicated in (c) can be interpreted as the replacement of the second character by two newcharacters.
large number of nodes and edges, even for a small number of taxa and characters,if there are a lot of incompatibilities among the characters. In the absence ofrecombination, many of the incompatibilities will be due to parallel- or back-mutations. Hence, one idea to reduce the complexity of the network is to try andresolve incompatibilities by identifying likely parallel mutations and making themexplicit. The resulting network is called a reduced median network .
In Figure 9.4a, we display a section of a median network restricted to four binary
sequences
00,01,10and11. Let us assume that the ﬁrst binary character has
a substantially higher weight than the second one, for example ω(1)≥2ω(2). In
this case we will assume that the mutation represented by the second characteroccurred twice, in parallel, as indicated in parts (b) and (c) of the ﬁgure. T o decidewhich of the two depicted scenarios is more likely, we count the frequencies ofcommon occurrences of the patterns
00or10,a n do ft h ep a t t e r n s 01or11,
in the given multiple sequence alignment M. If the former two patterns occur
with a higher frequency than the latter two, then we will resolve the parallelmutations as shown in (b), otherwise we will resolve them as shown in (c). Oneway to implement this step computationally is replace the character in which aparallel mutation is assumed to occur by two new characters that each mutateonly once. For example, for the resolution indicated in (c), we replace the secondcharacter in the sequence by two new characters to obtain the four sequences
000 ,
010 ,111 and110 in which all characters are compatible with each other, as
illustrated in (d).
When one character in the multiple sequence alignment Mis incompatible with
a whole set of other characters that are all compatible with each other, then again themedian network can be simpliﬁed by postulating an appropriate parallel mutation,as indicated in Figure 9.5. We do not describe in detail how to systematically detect
all opportunities for reduction in a median network.

223 9.5 Quasi-median networks
(a) (b)
Figure 9.5 (a) This median network shows that the fifth position of the given multiple sequence
alignment Mis incompatible with the other four positions. (b) The reduced median network
obtained after postulating a parallel mutation at position five of the alignment.
737369
369468
697
369737
165,925126,201,489126,201,489870,924,1098
21,99,156,276,384,
507,534,585,693,744,795,852,927,
942,960,969,
991,1074,1126
CRB2837CRB2205CRB2697CRB 2433CRB2696
CRB2698CRB2570 ,
CRB2667369
468
697369
165,925126,201,489126,201,489737,870,924,1098
21,99,156,276,384,
507,534,585,693, 737,
744,795,852,927,
942,960,969,
991,1074,1126
CRB 2837CRB2205CRB2697 CRB2433CRB2696
CRB2698CRB2570 ,
CRB2667
k r o w t e n n a i d e m d e c u d e R ) b ( k r o w t e n n a i d e M ) a (
Figure 9.6 (a) The median network for eight specimens of Callicebus lugens , based on cytochrome b
sequences. Specimens from the right bank of Rio Negro are shown in plain font and thosefrom the left bank are shown in bold font. (b) The reduced median network obtained bypostulating a parallel mutation at position 737.
9.4.2 Application
O n ea p p l i c a t i o nd o m a i no fm e d i a nn e t w o r k si sp h y l o g e o g r a p h i cs t u d i e s .F o re x a m -ple, in [44] the distribution of Callicebus lugens (Platyrrhini, Primates) at the Rio
Negro, in Brazil, is reported. The study focuses on eight specimens, one group offour taken from the left bank of the river and another group of four taken from theright bank. It is based on a multiple alignment Mof cytochrome bDNA sequences
of length 1140. A median-network analysis shows a clear separation of the twogroups, see Figure 9.6. Note that only 35 columns are retained in the condensed
version of M(the ones labeling the edges).
9.5 Quasi-median networks
In Section 9.4, we show that median networks are designed for representing binary
sequences. T o apply them to DNA (or other multi-state sequences), one must ﬁrstconvert the sequences into binary sequences as described in Section 9.2. Because
such a conversion usually discards phylogenetic information, the question arises:

224 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
Figure 9.7 (a) The quasi-median qm(a,b,c)for three sequences a,band c. (b) The corresponding
quasi-median network N.
How to modify the median calculation so that it works directly with multi-statedata? The answer is simple: whenever a column of three different states occurs inthe computation of the median, produce three median sequences, one for each ofthe different states. More formally, we introduce the concept of a quasi-median:Deﬁnition 9.5.1 (Quasi-median) Consider three DNA sequences a =a
1...aL,
b=b1...bLand c=c1...cL. The quasi-median of a, b and c is the set qm (a,b,c)
of all sequences d =d1...dLthat have the property that the state d ioccurs in the set
{ai,bi,ci}at least as many times as any other state, for each position i =1,..., L.
In other words, d=d1...dLis a member of qm(a,b,c) if and only if either the
i-th column (of the alignment of a,band c) contains at most two different states
and diis the majority state, or the column contains three different states and di
is any one of them, for all i. If the number of columns containing three different
states is k,t h e n qm(a,b,c) will contain 3kdifferent sequences. An example with
k=1 is shown in Figure 9.7.
LetMbe a multiple alignment of DNA sequences on X.W ed e ﬁ n et h equasi-
median closure ¯Mas the set of all sequences that can be obtained by repeatedly
taking the quasi-median of any three sequences in the set and then adding the resultto the set.
Aquasi-median network is a generalization of the concept of a median network
that takes allnon-constant columns of a multiple alignment of DNA sequences
[10] into account:
Deﬁnition 9.5.2 (Quasi-median network) Let M be a condensed multiple align-
ment of DNA sequences on X. The quasi-median network associated with M is a
phylogenetic network N =(V,E)whose node set is given by the quasi-median clo-
sure N =¯M and in which any two nodes are joined by an edge in E if and only
if they differ in exactly one position (as haplotypes). The associated taxon labelingλ:X→V maps each taxon x onto the node λ(x)that represents the corresponding
sequence.

225 9.5 Quasi-median networks
Figure 9.8 For the multiple sequence alignment Mof multi-state characters in (a) we list all quasi-
medians in (b). Note that taking medians of any of the sequences listed in (a) and (b) doesnot produce any new sequences, and so in this example the quasi-median closure–Mequals
the set of listed sequences. In (c) we show the corresponding quasi-median network N.
The quasi-median network of a condensed multiple sequence alignment Mis
uniquely deﬁned. Moreover, one can show that it is connected [ 10]. An example is
s h o w ni nF i g u r e 9.8. Recall that each column in a condensed alignment corresponds
to apattern in the original DNA alignment, which we describe using letters A,B,...
Note that the depicted network contains cycles of length three (“triangles”), thusillustrating that a quasi-median network is nota split network in general.
9.5.1 Algorithm
In theory, the quasi-median network can be constructed by ﬁrst computing thequasi-median closure ¯Mof the given input dataset Mand then producing the
phylogenetic network whose node set is given by ¯Mand whose edges are given
by all pairs of haplotypes in ¯Mthat differ in precisely one position, as shown in
Figure 9.8.
In practice, it is more efﬁcient to employ a modiﬁcation of the strategy used for
median networks [ 5]. The basic idea is to encode each column of multi-state data as
a group of binary columns, to then compute the median network for the alignmentof binary sequences, and then ﬁnally to convert back to multi-state characters,being careful to expand each encountered “virtual median” into a set of sequencesthat display all appropriate multi-state characters.
In more detail, assume that we are given a condensed multiple alignment Mof
DNA sequences on X. For ease of exposition, assume that the characters in Mare
labeled
A,B,...,E, representing the four DNA bases and the gap character.

226 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
A0B1A 000B 110C 101A 0000B 1100C 1010D 1001A 00000B 11000C 10100D 10010E 10001
(a) 2 states (b) 3 states (c) 4 states (d) 5 states
Figure 9.9 The binary expansion M1of a condensed multiple alignment Mof DNA sequences is
obtained by replacing each column that contains 2,3,4or5different states by a group of
1to5binary columns, converting each state A–Einto a corresponding binary pattern, as
indicated in (a) to (d), respectively.
The ﬁrst step is to compute the binary expansion M 1ofMin which every column
ofMis represented by a group of binary columns in M1.F o re a c hc o l u m n CofM,
we compute the corresponding group of columns in M1as follows: If the column C
contains only two different states, then the corresponding group of columns in M1
contains only one column, which is obtained from Cby changing all occurrences
ofAby0and all occurrences of Bby1. If the number of different states contained
in the column Cisd>2, then the column Cgives rise to a group of dbinary
columns, in which each of the letters A–Eis represented by a speciﬁc binary pattern
as prescribed in Figure 9.9.
The second step is to compute the median closure M2=¯M1. For computational
reasons, one should ﬁrst collapse all identical columns in M1before computing ¯M1
and then expand them all again to obtain M2.
The third step is to convert M2back to a representation M3of multi-state data.
T o do this, each group of columns is converted back to a single column using thetables shown in Figure 9.9. Note that a group of three or more columns may contain
binary patterns that are not listed in the tables. Such binary patterns are producedby the median operation and we refer to them as virtual medians ,a st h e ya r en o t
the medians of binary characters but rather of our binary encoding of multi-statecharacters. Virtual medians are represented in M
3by the state ‘ ∗’.
By deﬁnition, a virtual median is obtained as the median of three different binary
patterns that represent three different multi-state characters, according to the tablesshown in Figure 9.9. (Please convince yourself that the binary patterns listed in
each of the tables have the property that the median of any three different ones isnot contained in the table.)
In the fourth step we obtain a new multiple alignment M
4of multi-state char-
acters from M3by expanding each sequence M3that contains a virtual median ∗
into a set of new sequences, each one obtained by replacing each virtual median byany one of the states
A–Ethat occur in the column. Remove any duplicate columns
from M4.

227 9.6 Median-joining
Finally, the quasi-median network Nassociated with the given multiple align-
ment of DNA sequences Mis constructed as the graph N=(V,E)t h a th a sn o d e
setV=M4a n di nw h i c ha n yt w on o d e sa r ec o n n e c t e db ya ne d g ei n Eif and only
if the two nodes differ in exactly one position (as haplotypes). Here is a summaryof the algorithm [ 5].
Algorithm 9.5.3 (Quasi-median network) Let M be a condensed multiple align-
ment of DNA sequences on X. The quasi-median network N associated with M is
computed in the following steps:
(i)Compute the binary expansion M
1for M.
(ii)Compute the median closure M 2for M 1.
(iii) Compute the multi-state representation M 3for M 2.
(iv) Compute M 4by expanding all virtual medians in M 3and then removing any
duplicate copies.
(v)Construct the graph N =(V,E)that has node set V =M4and in which any
two nodes vandware connected by an edge e in E with label i, if and only if v
andwdiffer only in their i-th position (as haplotypes).
An example illustrating this algorithm is presented in Figure 9.10.
9.6 Median-joining
The number of nodes of the quasi-median network associated with a condensedmultiple alignment of DNA sequences MonXcan be very large, even for a small
number of short sequences. Thus, the quasi-median network is rarely useful inpractice. In this section, we describe the median-joining algorithm [ 10]t h a ta i m s
at computing a phylogenetic network that is as informative as a quasi-mediannetwork, but usually much smaller. As we will see, the algorithm has a parameter/Delta1that is used to control how complex the resulting phylogenetic network will be.
LetMbe a condensed multiple alignment of DNA sequences on X. The median-
joining method brings together two different algorithmic ideas. On the one hand,it repeatedly uses the concept of a “(relaxed) minimum spanning network” , andon the other hand, it repeatedly employs the quasi-median calculation. While theformer construction, on its own, will produce too few nodes to be useful, the latterconstruction, on its own, will produce too many nodes. Using both together, themedian-joining method attempts to provide a useful network of intermediate size.
9.6.1 The relaxed minimum spanning network
LetMbe a condensed multiple alignment of DNA sequences X.T ob ea b l et o
employ the concept of a minimum spanning network, we need to deﬁne a distance

228 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
Figure 9.10 For the condensed multiple sequence alignment Mof multi-state characters in (a) we first
compute the binary expansion M1(b). We then generate the median closure M2=–M1,
first collapsing all identical columns in M1(c) before computing–M1(d). We record which
columns are collapsed together (marked ◦and•in (b)) and then expand them all again
to obtain M2(e). We then compute the multi-state representation M3forM2(f). Finally,
we obtain the matrix M4by expanding all virtual medians in M3(g) and then removing any
duplicate copies (h). In (i) we show the quasi-median network NforM.
matrix DonX. A natural choice is to use the (unnormalized) Hamming distance
H(a,b) between any two sequences aand binM.
In practice, the multiple sequence alignment Mwill usually be obtained by
condensing some original input multiple sequence alignment M0.T ot a k et h i si n t o

229 9.6 Median-joining
account, whenever we compare two sequences in Mwe must weight each position
inMby the number of original positions in M0that it represents. This gives rise
to a distance matrix Din which the distance d(a,b) between any two sequences
aand binMis given by the sum of weights of all positions at which aand b
differ.
Consider the graph G=(V,E,ω) that has node set V=Xand whose edge
setEcontains all possible edges between any two nodes in V.M o r e o v e r ,l e t
ω:E→R≥0be an edge weighting that reﬂects D, that is, with ω(e)=d(v,w )
for every edge e={v,w}inE.W ew i l lc a l l Gthedistance graph associated with
M.
Aminimum spanning tree forGis any subtree TofGthat connects all nodes
ofGand that minimizes the sum of edge weights given by ω(T)=/summationtext
einTω(e).
There are two different algorithms for computing a minimum spanning tree, Prim’salgorithm [ 199] and Kruskal’s algorithm [155].
The latter starts with a subgraph Tthat contains only the nodes of G.I tt h e n
considers each edge eofGin ascending order of weight and adds etoT,i fejoins
two different connected components of T.T h ea l g o r i t h mt e r m i n a t e sa ss o o na st h e
subgraph Tbecomes connected.
In the algorithm all edges that have the same weight are processed consecutively
in some order. This order serves as an implicit “tie-breaking” rule and differentorderings may give rise to different minimum spanning trees.
The minimum spanning network forMis deﬁned as the subgraph Nof the
corresponding distance graph Gwhose edge set is obtained as the union of the
edge sets of all minimum spanning trees of G. It can be computed as follows [10]:
Algorithm 9.6.1 (Minimum spanning network) For a given edge-weighted, con-
nected graph G =(V,E,ω), the minimum spanning network N is computed as
follows: Initially, let N be the subgraph of G that contains all nodes of G and noedges. Let w
1<w 2...<w tdenote the different edge weights that occur in G. For
i=1,..., t repeat the following steps:
(i)Add all edges of weight wito N that join different connected components.
(ii)If N is connected, terminate.
In this algorithm, all edges of the same weight are treated equally, that is, eitherthey are all put into the minimum spanning network, or they are all left out.For real data, it can be useful to introduce a tolerance /Delta1up to which we do not
distinguish between different distance values. Let Gbe a distance graph and let N
be the corresponding minimum spanning network. We deﬁne the relaxed minimum
spanning network N
/primewith parameter /Delta1> 0 as the graph that contains all edges of

230 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
abcde f
a 033122
b 303212
c 330221
d 122011
e 212101
f 221110
(a) Distances M (b) Minimum spanning (c) Minimum spannin g
tree T1 tree T2
(d) Minimum spanning (e) Minimum spanning (f) Relaxed minimum
tree T3 network N spanning network N
Figure 9.11 The distance matrix MonX={a,..., f}shown in (a) gives rise to three different minimum
spanning trees T1,T2and T3, shown in (b), (c) and (d), respectively. The corresponding
minimum spanning network Nis shown in (e). The relaxed minimum spanning network
N/primefor/Delta1=1i ss h o w ni n( f ) .
N, and, in addition, also those heavier edges of Gw h o s ew e i g h t sd on o te x c e e dt h e
heaviest weight in Nby more than /Delta1.
Exercise 9.6.2 Modify Algorithm 9.6.1 so that it computes the relaxed minimum
spanning network for parameter /Delta1.
An alternative method of computing the minimum spanning network can be foundin [72].
In Figure 9.11, we show a distance matrix DonX={a,..., f}that gives rise
to three different minimum spanning trees T
1,T2and T3. The displayed minimum
spanning network Nclearly contains all edges of the three trees. As the heavi-
e s tw e i g h ti n Nis one, the relaxed minimum spanning network N/primewith/Delta1=1
additionally contains six edges of weight two.
9.6.2 The median-joining algorithm
LetMbe a condensed multiple alignment of DNA sequences on X. The median-
joining algorithm uses the quasi-median operation to compute new sequences fromexisting ones. T o avoid computing the full quasi-median closure, the algorithm isguided by the relaxed minimum spanning network N
/Delta1of the distance graph G

231 9.6 Median-joining
associated with M, for a given user-speciﬁed tolerance /Delta1≥0. The idea is to apply
the quasi-median calculation only to sets of sequences that lie close to each otherin the relaxed minimum spanning network N
/Delta1and are not already connected to
each other by chains of short edges [ 10]:
Algorithm 9.6.3 (Median-joining) Let M be a condensed multiple alignment of
DNA sequences on Xand/Delta1≥0. The associated median-joining network N is com-
puted in the following steps:
(i)Set S equal to the set of sequences contained in M.
(ii)Compute the relaxed minimum spanning network N /Delta1for the current set of
sequences S. Determine the set of all couples {a,b}of sequences a and b in S
that are connected by an edge e in N /Delta1and are not connected by any chain of
edges e 1,..., etin which each edge has a weight of at most ω(e)−/Delta1.
(iii) Any node contained in N /Delta1that does not represent one of the original input
sequences in M and is only contained in at most two couples is deemed obsolete
and is removed from S. If any removals occur, return to step (ii).
(iv) Decide which new sequences to add to S in the following steps.
(a)Let T be the set of all triples {a,b,c}of sequences in S for which at least two of
the three subsets {a,b},{b,c},{a,c}are couples. Compute µ=qm(a,b,c)
for all{a,b,c}in T.
(b)For each sequence f in µthat is not already contained in S, compute its
connection cost as d(f,a)+d(f,b)+d(f,c), where d (x,y)is computed
as the weighted number of differences between sequences x and y.
(c)Letλbe the minimum connection cost seen in (b) over all triples in T.
(d)For each triple {a,b,c}in T, compute µ=qm(a,b,c), and then, for every
sequence f in µ, add f to S, if the connection cost for f does not exceed
λ+/Delta1.
(e)If any new sequences are added to S in (d), return to step (ii).
(v)In this step we generate the ﬁnal network. Compute the minimum spanningnetwork N for S (with parameter /Delta1=0) and determine the set of couples, as in
step (i). If any obsolete nodes are present, remove them and return to step (iv).Otherwise, the set of couples deﬁnes the edge set of the ﬁnal network N.
9.6.3 Application
Median-joining is a widely used method. An interesting application of this methodcan be found in [151], where a median-joining network on human populations iscomputed for mitochondrial DNA samples. The network (displayed in Figure 9.12)
is consistent with the out-of-Africa model of human origins, which suggests thatall non-African populations are derived from one African lineage.

232 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
Figure 9.12 A median-joining network on human populations computed from mtDNA (adapted from
[60,151 ]). Each disk in the tree represents a cluster of human mitochondrial types and its
diameter is proportional to the number of sequences represented. For African sequences,edges between individual types are collapsed and not shown. The cluster containing allnon-African sequences is shown here in a non-collapsed view. Note that it attaches to onlyone of the clusters of African lineages. This network is consistent with the out-of-Africamodel of human origins, suggesting that all non-African populations are derived from oneAfrican lineage.
9.7 Pruned quasi-median networks
As mentioned above, the number of nodes and edges in a quasi-median networkcan be unmanageably large. We saw that the median-joining method [ 10] tries
to avoid constructing the full quasi-median closure using a heuristic based on theconcept of a relaxed minimum spanning network. A more recent method [ 5]a i m sa t
computing a pruned version of the full quasi-median network by considering onlythose sequences that lie on a geodesic between two of the original input sequences.
The result is called a geodesically pruned quasi-median network .
The deﬁnition and computation of geodesics require some additional concepts.
Deﬁnition 9.7.1 (Restricted quasi-median) Consider three DNA sequences a, b and
c of length L . Moreover, assume that we are given two reference sequences ga n d h
of length L . The restricted quasi-median of a, b and c, relative to g and h is deﬁned
as the set qm
g,h(a,b,c)of all sequences d of length L that have the property that d i
is the majority state in (ai,bi,ci), if there is one, and otherwise d iis contained in
{ai,bi,ci}∩{ gi,hi}, for all positions i =1,..., L.
LetMbe a condensed multiple alignment of DNA sequences of length L.F o re a c h
character state cand each position iinMwe deﬁne the score s(c,i)a st h ef r a c t i o n
of sequences in Mthat have state cat position i. The score of an arbitrary sequence
aof length Lis then deﬁned as
s(a)=log/parenleftBiggL/summationdisplay
i=1s(ai,i)/parenrightBigg
. (9.4)

233 9.8 Recombination networks
Ifaand bare two sequences of length Lthat are nodes of some graph Gwhose
nodes are all sequences of length L,t h e nageodesic between aand bis any path
P=(v1,v2,...,v t)o fn o d e sf r o m atobinGthat has minimum total score
s(P)=/summationtextt
i=1s(vi). The geodesically-pruned quasi-median network can be com-
puted using the following algorithm [ 5]:
Algorithm 9.7.2 (Geodesically pruned quasi-median network) Let M be a con-
densed multiple alignment of DNA sequences on X. Output is the associated geodesi-
cally pruned quasi-median network N. Process each pair of sequences a and b in Mas follows:
(i)Extract the sub-alignment M
abfrom M that consists of all columns of M for
which the states of a and b differ.
(ii)Compute the closure ¯Mabof the restricted quasi-median operation on M abrelative
to a and b.
(iii) Construct the graph G abwith node set ¯Mabin which any two nodes are connected
by an edge if and only if they differ by exactly one position (as haplotypes).
(iv) Remove all sequences from ¯Mabthat do not lie on a geodesic from a to b in G ab.
(v)Let S abbe the result of expanding all sequences in ¯Mabback to their original
length by reinserting all positions at which a and b have the same state.
The ﬁnal network N =(V,E)has node set V =/uniontext
a/negationslash=bSaband an edge set E that
consists of all pairs of nodes that differ by exactly one position (as haplotypes). Anassociated taxon labeling λ:X→V maps each taxon x onto the node λ(x)that
represents the corresponding sequence.
9.7.1 Application
An application of the geodesically pruned quasi-median network algorithm canbe found in [ 5], where it is applied to 110 sequences from the spacer regions of
the 5S ribosomal DNA loci of sea beet ( Beta vulgaris ssp. martima). The resulting
phylogenetic network (reproduced in Figure 9.13) contains 648 nodes. It shows a
separation between harbor and cliff top populations, in agreement with previousstudies.
9.8 Recombination networks
A recombination network is a rooted phylogenetic network that is used to describethe evolution of a set of closely related sequences (usually from different individualsof a population) in terms of mutations (along edges of the network), speciationevents (at tree nodes) and recombination events (at reticulate nodes).
In a simple recombination event, two sequences aand bof the same length L
give rise to a new sequence cof length Lthat consists of a preﬁx of the sequence a

234 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
Figure 9.13 The geodesically pruned quasi-median network of 110 sequences from the spacer regions
of the 5S ribosomal DNA loci of sea beet (Beta vulgaris ssp. maritima )[5]. It shows a
separation between harbor and cliff top populations, which can be found at the top halfand bottom half of the network, respectively. Reproduced from BMC Bioinformatics 9:115(2008) under the Creative Commons Attribution License.
and a sufﬁx of the sequence b(or vice-versa), see Figure 9.14.T h i si sk n o w na sa
single crossover event. In a multiple crossover event, the resulting sequence cconsists
of a mosaic of segments from aand b. In either type of event, the character state ci
is either aiorbifor every position i=1,..., Lof the sequence c.
LetMbe a multiple sequence alignment on X. In the following we assume that
the sequences in Mare binary sequences, as discussed in Section 9.2.H o w e v e r ,t h e
ordering of characters along the sequences matters in the context of recombinations

235 9.8 Recombination networks
aACGTTGGCC AGTTGA
bccattgaat gtttca
cACGTTGGCC gtttca
Figure 9.14 The sequence cis obtained from the sequences aand bby a single crossover between
positions 9and 10. The first nine character states of cequal the first nine character states of
a(shown in upper-case) and the latter six equal those of sequence b(shown in lower-case).
and so we usually do notassume that the multiple sequence alignment Mhas been
condensed. Here is the deﬁnition of a recombination network [ 89,98,128]:
Deﬁnition9.8.1 (Recombination network) Let M be a multiple alignment of binary
sequences of length L, on X.Arecombination network N representing M is given
by a bicombining rooted phylogenetic network on X, together with two additional
labellings:
(i)Each node vof N is labeled by a binary sequence σ(v)of length L .
(ii)Each tree edge e is labeled by a set of positions δ(e)⊆{1,..., L}.
These two labellings must fulﬁll the following compatibility conditions:
(i)The sequence σ(v)assigned to any leaf vmust equal the sequence in M that is
given for the taxon associated with v.
(ii)If r is a reticulate node (often called a recombination node in this context)
with parents vandw, then the sequence σ(r)must be obtainable from the two
sequences σ(v)andσ(w)by a crossover.
(iii) If e=(v,w )is a tree edge, then the set of positions at which the two sequences
σ(v)andσ(w)differ must equal δ(e).
For computational reasons, the following condition is usually also required [ 150]:
(iv) Any given position may mutate at most once in the network. In other words, forany given position i there exists at most one edge e with i ∈δ(e).
This condition is usually referred to as the inﬁnite sites assumption because for
sequences of inﬁnite length it holds that the probability of the same site being hitby a mutation more than once is zero, under a uniform distribution.
A simple example of a recombination network is shown in Figure 9.15.
Exercise 9.8.2 (Verify recombination network) Verify that the network N shown
in Figure 9.15 is a valid recombination network for the given alignment M. Does
it fulﬁll the inﬁnite sites assumption? Can the sequence at node r be obtained by asingle-crossover recombination from the parental sequences?

236 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
a10000
b11000
c11100
d00110
e00111
(a) Alignment M (b) Recombination network N
Figure 9.15 (a) A multiple alignment of binary sequences of length five on X={a,..., e}. (b) A recom-
bination network NforM. For each node vwe show the sequence σ(v)and for each edge
ewe show the set of positions δ(e). In this example, that set is either empty (unlabeled
edges) or contains only one position (from 1to5).
Evolution in the presence of recombination events is usually studied in popu-lation genetics, rather than phylogeny, focusing on the statistical analysis of theinheritance and prevalence of genes in populations. Under the “coalescent-with-recombination” model, a description of the history of nsampled sequences going
backward in time gives rise to a graph that is called an ancestral recombination graph
(ARG )[90,108].
9.8.1 The local-tree parsimony approach
LetMbe a multiple alignment of binary sequences of length Land let Nbe a
corresponding recombination network, on X. Consider a position iin the align-
ment. For any particular reticulate node rinNt h ec h a r a c t e rs t a t ea tp o s i t i o n i
of the sequence σ(r) is copied from exactly one of the two parents of r.I nc o n -
sequence, each individual character in Mevolves along some rooted phylogenetic
tree embedded in N. In the recombination network shown in Figure 9.15,t h eﬁ r s t
two characters evolve along the tree in which the leaf labeled cis a child of the node
labeled 11000 , whereas the last three characters evolve along the tree in which the
leaf labeled cis a child of the node labeled 00100 .
So, in consequence, the evolutionary history of any sufﬁciently short segment of
sequence is a rooted phylogenetic tree. This insight leads to the following approach:
(i) Determine a suitable rooted phylogenetic tree Tifor each position iin the
alignment M.W ew i l lr e f e rt oa n ys u c ht r e e Tias alocal tree.
(ii) Combine all the trees into a suitable rooted phylogenetic network N.

237 9.8 Recombination networks
When doing this, there is a trade-off to be made between the number of incom-patibilities between a character and its associated local tree on the one hand, andthe “recombination cost” of switching from one tree topology to a different whengoing from position itoi+1, on the other.
The ﬁrst part of the approach can be formulated as a dynamic programming
problem [ 106]. T o this end, we deﬁne a local-tree graph G =(V,E) for Mand
Xas follows. For each position iinMand each possible rooted phylogenetic tree
TonXletv(i,T)b ean o d ei n V. Any two nodes v(i,T)a n dv (i+1,T
/prime)a t
adjacent positions in the alignment are connected by a directed edge e=(v(i,T),
v(i+1,T/prime)).
Each node in Gis assigned a weight ω(v(i,T)) that equals the minimum
number of substitutions required for the i-th character on the rooted phy-
logenetic tree T.E a c he d g e e=(v(i,T),v(i+1,T/prime)) is assigned a weight
ω(v(i,T),v(i+1,T/prime))=ω(e) that reﬂects the recombination distance between
Tand T/prime(see below for more details).
Now, in the local-tree graph Gany path
P=(v(1,T1),v(2,T2),...,v (L,TL)) (9.5)
that starts at some node v(1,T1) and ends at some node v(L,TL) selects a rooted
phylogenetic tree Tifor each position iinM.T h et o t a lw e i g h to fs u c hap a t h Pis
obtained by adding all node weights and all edge weights along the path:
W(P)=L/summationdisplay
i=1ω(v(i,Ti))+L−1/summationdisplay
i=1ω(v(i,Ti),v(i+1,Ti+1)). (9.6)
Amost parsimonious set of trees for Mis given by a path Pof minimum weight
W(P), which can be computed by standard dynamic programming using the
following recursion:
W(i,T)=min
T/prime{W(i−1,T/prime)+ω((v(i−1,T/prime),v(i,T)))+ω(v(i,T))},
ifi>1,
ω(v(1,T)), else.
(9.7)
Before this recursion can be used, we need to specify how to determine the weight
of a node ω(v(i,T)) and the weight of an edge ω(v(i−1,T/prime),v(i+1,T)). Since
the weight of a node is simply the parsimony score for the i-th character on the tree
T, it can be efﬁciently computed as described in Section 3.7.1. The weight of an edge
is the minimum number of reticulate nodes in a rooted phylogenetic network thatcontains both trees Tand T
/prime. An algorithm that addresses this NP-hard problem
is discussed in Section 11.5.

238 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
The described approach is not practical for three reasons. First, the number of
possible rooted phylogenetic trees for ntaxa is (2 n−3)!! (see Section 3.3), and
thus is very large even for relatively small values of n. Second, the computation of
each edge weight in the graph is NP-hard. Finally, the second part of the approach,computation of a suitable rooted phylogenetic network that represents all the trees,is an NP-hard problem, see Section 11.5.
Although the approach is not practical, it is conceptually appealing because
it explicitly addresses the mosaic nature of aligned sequences: a long multiple
sequence alignment consists of stretches of sequence that have evolved along acommon rooted phylogenetic tree and these stretches are separated by crossoverpositions at which recombinations have occurred.
We illustrate the approach in Figure 9.16. For the given multiple alignment Mof
binary sequences of length 11 on X={a,b,c,d,e}we indicate the corresponding
local-tree graph G. The graph has 11 columns of nodes, each column containing
one node for each of the possible rooted phylogenetic trees on X.A l ln o d e so fa
column are connected to all nodes of the next column by edges. The nodes andedges are weighted as described above. In this example, the ﬁrst ﬁve characters of M
are all compatible with the tree T
1, whereas the last six characters are all compatible
with the tree T2, and so in this case a path through Gthat chooses T1for the ﬁrst
ﬁve positions and then T2for the remaining six positions is optimal. The depicted
rooted phylogenetic network Ncontains both T1and T2and is a recombination
network for M. More precisely, Nis a recombination network if one adds the
appropriate labeling of the nodes by sequences and edges by mutations.Exercise 9.8.3 (Labeling of recombination network) Label the nodes and edges of
the rooted network N depicted in Figure 9.16e so that the network becomes a complete
recombination network for the alignment M shown in part (a) of the ﬁgure.
9.8.2 A heuristic for the local-tree approach
LetMbe a multiple alignment of binary sequences of length LonX. We now look
at a heuristic for computing a recombination network NforMthat is based on the
ideas just discussed [106]. A ﬁrst simpliﬁcation in this approach is to use unrootedphylogenetic trees rather than rooted ones. The main simpliﬁcation is to consideronly a small part of the full local-tree graph.
The heuristic starts by computing a phylogenetic tree Tfrom the whole dataset M
using the maximum parsimony method. This tree will be used as a start tree and isassigned to position 1 of the alignment. Next, we compute the SPR-neighborhood S
ofTconsisting of Ta n da l lp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e st h a ta r ee x a c t l yo n eS P Rm o d i ﬁ c a t i o n
away from T. The main recursion of the previous section is repeatedly applied to
t h el o c a l - t r e eg r a p hr e s t r i c t e dt on o d e st h a tc o n t a i nat r e ef r o m Suntil a position

239 9.8 Recombination networks
1234567891 0 1 1
a100011000 1 1
b110001000 1 1
c110000101 0 1
d001110111 0 0
e001110111 0 0
(a) Alignment M
...
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
...
(1,T)
(11,T )1
2
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
(b) Local-trees graph G
e d b c a e d b c a
(c) Tree T1 (d) Tree T2
e d b c a
(e) Recombination network N
Figure 9.16 (a) A multiple alignment Mof binary sequences of length 11onX={a,b,c,d,e}.
(b) The local-tree graph Gassociated with M. Each column of nodes represents all possible
rooted phylogenetic trees for the corresponding column in M. All nodes in one column are
connected to all nodes in the next column (but not all these edges are shown, for clarity).The path highlighted in bold chooses the tree T
1(c) for the first five positions of Mand then
the tree T2(d) for the remaining six positions. In (e) we show the resulting recombination
network N.
is reached at which a jump to a different tree T/primeinSis indicated by the recursion.
We then determine the SPR-neighborhood S/primeofT/primeand continue the calculation
with T/primeand S/primein place of Tand S.S e eF i g u r e9.17.
The resulting set of trees might depend quite strongly on the initial tree used.
Hence, after completing the ﬁrst pass of the algorithm, a second pass is performed

240 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
...
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
...
(1,T)
(11,T )1
2
Figure 9.17 The heuristic algorithm considers only those trees in the local-tree graph that differ at most
by one SPR from the current tree.
in the opposite direction, using the local tree that was previously chosen for the lastposition of the alignment as the new start tree. This should be repeated a coupleof times to completely erase any dependency on the initial choice of start tree. Theﬁnal pass produces a set of local trees and breakpoint positions along the sequencesthat reﬂect the recombination history of the given set of sequences.Exercise 9.8.4 (Single SPR neighborhood) Design an algorithm that quickly gen-
erates all unrooted phylogenetic trees that are one SPR away from a given unrootedphylogenetic tree T on X.
This heuristic is an example of a general approach to studying recombination thatoperates by scanning along a multiple sequence alignment, building trees for localsegments of the sequence and then comparing the trees in an attempt to determinerecombination crossover positions.
As mentioned above, once a set of phylogenetic trees has been constructed
for the different stretches of a multiple sequence alignment M,t h e ni nas e c o n d
step these trees may be combined into a recombination network to representthe evolutionary history of the data. By design of the heuristic, the local treesof neighboring positions will differ by at most one SPR and so in this case thecalculation of a corresponding network should be easier than in the general case.However, this step is still challenging in practice and it is not explicitly describedin [106].
9.9 Galled trees
In the previous section we reported that the problem of constructing a minimumrecombination network is a computationally hard problem. T o address this, wepresented a heuristic approach. A different way to ease the computational difﬁcul-ties is to restrict ones attention to phylogenetic networks that have a very simpletopology.
Recall that a rooted phylogenetic network NonXis called a galled tree, if for
any two reticulations rand r
/primeand any two undirected cycles that contain rand r/prime,

241 9.9 Galled trees
respectively, it holds that the two cycles are edge-disjoint (see Section 6.11.1). This
is the topologically simplest form of a non-tree network.
We are interested in the following problem: given a multiple alignment of binary
sequences MonX,h o wt od e t e r m i n ew h e t h e r Mcan be represented by a recom-
bination network Nthat is a galled tree using only single crossovers, and, if this is
the case, how to construct such a network?
T o address this question, we ﬁrst consider a restricted instance of the problem in
which the alignment Mis condensed and the corresponding incompatibility graph
IG(S(M)) is connected. We then discuss how the solution to the problem in the
restricted case can be used to obtain a solution when IG(S(M)) has more than
one connected component. Finally, we show how to modify the approach furtherso as to be able to drop the restriction to condensed alignments, too, thus obtaininga solution for anymultiple alignment of binary sequences.
9.9.1 Restricted case of condensed alignments and single galls
In the context of recombination it is generally not appropriate to assume that thegiven alignment Mhas been condensed because the order of columns and crossover
positions is important. However, for ease of exposition we ﬁrst assume that thegiven alignment Mi s condensed. Later, in Subsection 9.9.3 we show that only a
small modiﬁcation of the described approach is required to accommodate the moregeneral case of non-condensed alignments.
LetMbe a condensed multiple alignment of binary sequences on X. Consider
the incompatibility graph IG(S(M)) for the set of splits associated with M.F o r
simplicity, in this section we assume that IG(S(M)) consists of exactly one non-
trivial component. This assumption implies that the corresponding recombinationnetwork Nis biconnected and contains exactly one reticulate node r,i fi ti sag a l l e d
tree. In Section 9.9.2 we will discuss how to handle the more general case.
A ﬁrst necessary condition for the existence of a galled tree that represents M
is that removal of a single taxon h(associated with the reticulate node r) must
resolve all incompatibilities between columns in M. In other words, we require
that a taxon hinXexists such that we have:
/intersectiondisplay
(i,j)∈IC(M)Q(i,j)={h}, (9.8)
where IC(M) is the set of all pairs of columns iand jofMthat are incompatible
and Q(i,j)={Ai∩Aj,Ai∩Bj,Bi∩Aj,Bi∩Bj}denotes the set of all four
possible intersections of split parts of the two splits Si=Ai
Biand Sj=Aj
Bjassociated
with columns iand j.
Now, let iand jbe any two columns of Mthat are incompatible. As the two
associated splits Siand Sjcannot be represented by the same phylogenetic tree,

242 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
123
a000
b100
c101
d010
e111123Q(1,2) ={{a},{b,c},{d},{e}}
Q(2,3) ={{a,b},{c,},{d},{e}}
I(1,2) ={1}
I(2,3) ={2}
(a) Alignment M (b)IG(S(M)) (c) V alues for Qand I
Figure 9.18 For the multiple sequence alignment Mshown in (a), we display the associated incom-
patibility graph IG(S(M))in (b), and the resulting values for Qand Iin (c) as used in
Lemma 9.9.1. While the values for Q(1,2)and Q(2,3)imply that both dand esatisfy con-
dition (i) of the lemma, the values for I(1,2)and I(2,3)imply that no single-crossover
position exists that satisfies condition (ii). Hence, Mcannot be represented by a galled tree.
it follows that any recombination network Nthat represents Mmust postulate
a crossover somewhere between positions iand j, that is, immediately after one
of the positions in the set I(i,j)={k|i≤k<j}. Because we only allow one
single-crossover recombination, there must exist one single-crossover position p
that takes care of all pairs of incompatibilities. This second necessary condition canbe expressed as follows:
/intersectiondisplay
(i,j)∈IC(M)I(i,j)/negationslash=∅. (9.9)
These two necessary conditions are also sufﬁcient [ 221]:
Lemma 9.9.1 (Existence of galled tree recombination network) Let M be a con-
densed multiple alignment of binary sequences on Xwhose incompatibility graph
IG(S(M))consists of exactly one non-trivial connected component. Then, there
exists a recombination network N that represents M and is a galled tree using a singlecrossover, if and only if the following two conditions hold:
(i)There exists a taxon h in Xwhose removal resolves all incompatibilities, in other
words,/intersectiontext
(i,j)∈IC(M)Q(i,j)={h}.
(ii)There exists a corresponding single-crossover location, in other words,/intersectiontext
(i,j)∈IC(M)I(i,j)/negationslash=∅.
For an application of the lemma, consider the multiple sequence alignment M
shown in Figure 9.18a. The associated incompatibility graph IG(S(M)) shown in
part (b) has three nodes and two edges. The intersection of the two sets Q(1,2)
and Q(2,3) (shown in part (c)) contains two sets, namely {d}and{e}.H e n c e ,
condition (i) of the lemma holds. This means that either taxon dor taxon emight
be associated with a recombination event. However, the intersection of the sets

243 9.9 Galled trees
I(1,2) and I(2,3) (also shown in part (c)) is empty, and thus a recombination
involving only a single crossover is not possible in this example.
The lemma is the basis of an algorithm [ 98] for determining a galled tree (single
crossover) recombination network, if one exists, which we now describe. Let M
be a condensed multiple alignment of binary sequences on Xwhose associated
incompatibility graph IG(S(M)) is connected.
First, check the conditions of the lemma. If both are fulﬁlled, then let hbe
the taxon identiﬁed in the ﬁrst condition. Determine the set of clusters Ch=
{S(h)−{h}|S∈S(M)}∪{X−{h}}obtained by considering each split in S(M),
taking the split part S(h)t h a tc o n t a i n s hand removing hfrom it. Then we construct
ag r a p h H(Ch)=(V,E) with node set V=Chand edge set Ethat is essentially
the Hasse diagram for ( Ch,⊆), but in which the directions of all edges have been
reversed. In more detail, for any two nodes vandwwe have that ( v,w )i sa n
edge in Eif and only if w/subsetnoteqlv(as clusters) and there exists no third node uwith
w/subsetnoteqlu/subsetnoteqlv.
We label each node vby the taxon that is contained in vbut not in any child of v
(as clusters). At least one such taxon must exist by deﬁnition of the graph. The factthat not more than one such taxon can exist follows from the assumption that Mis
condensed. For the sake of contradiction, let us suppose that two such taxa aand b
exist. This implies that no cluster in C
hseparates them. This in turn implies, from
the deﬁnition of Ch,t h a t aand bhave exactly the same sequence, a contradiction.
We extend the graph H(Ch) by creating an additional node rwith label h. Because
all pairs of incompatible columns are separated by a single crossover position, thereare only two possible layouts of the graph H(C
h) .T h eﬁ r s tp o s s i b l el a y o u ti st h a t
Hconsists of a single directed path, in which case we attach the node rto the ﬁrst
and last node of the path. The other possible layout is that H(Ch) consists of two
directed paths that both issue from a common node (the root), in which case weattach the node rt ot h el a s tn o d eo fe a c hp a t h .
Strictly speaking, the resulting network does not fulﬁll the deﬁnition of a rooted
phylogenetic network because the nodes labeled by taxa are not leaves (in fact thenetwork constructed in this subsection does not have any leaves). This is easilyﬁxed by simply adding all missing leaf edges at the very end of the computation.
If the alignment Mcan be represented by some galled tree, then there may be
more than one solution. For example, in the simplest case of four different binarysequences of length 2 there exist four possible galled trees N
1,..., N4that represent
M, as shown in Figure 9.19.
Here is a summary of the algorithm [ 98]:
Algorithm 9.9.2 (Galled tree for single component) Let M be a multiple alignment
of binary sequences on X. Assume that M is condensed and that the incompatibility

244 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
00011011
10 01
1100
00 11
1001
00 11
0110
01 10
0011
(a)M (b)N1 (c)N2 (d)N3 (e)N4
Figure 9.19 The multiple alignment of binary sequences Mshown in (a) can be represented by any of
the four different recombination networks N1,..., N4indicated in (b)–(e).
graph I G (S(M))consists of a single non-trivial connected component. If and only if
both conditions of Lemma 9.9.1 are fulﬁlled, then a galled-tree recombination network
N representing M can be computed as follows:
(i)Let h be the taxon identiﬁed in condition (i) of Lemma 9.9.1.
(ii)Determine the set of clusters
Ch={S(h)−{h}|S∈S(M/prime)}∪{X−{h}}. (9.10)
(iii) Construct the network H (Ch)and a new node r labeled h.
(iv) If H (Ch)consists of a single directed path, then attach r to the ﬁrst and last node
of the path.
(v)Otherwise, H (Ch)must consist of two directed paths that both issue from a
common node (the root). Attach r to the last node of each path.
(vi) The crossover location associated with r can be chosen as any number that satisﬁescondition (ii) of Lemma 9.9.1.
For an example of how the algorithm operates, see Figure 9.20. The multiple
sequence alignment Mdepicted there gives rise to values of the functions Qand I
that satisfy the conditions of Lemma 9.9.1 if one chooses h=e, for example. For
this choice, we obtain the following set of clusters:
C
e={ { a,b,c,d},{b,c},{c},{d}}. (9.11)
The Hasse diagram H(Ce) is shown in Figure 9.20e. By attaching an additional
node (labeled e) to the bottom nodes of the Hasse diagram, and then adding all
necessary leaf edges, we obtain a galled tree NonXthat represents M,a ss h o w n
in part (g). The tree edges of Nare labeled by the positions at which the sequences
change along those edges. The sequence for eobtains its ﬁrst two positions from
cand its last position from d, by a single crossover located between positions 2
and 3.Exercise 9.9.3 (Alternative galled tree) In the example just described, choose h =d
rather than h =e and then construct the corresponding galled tree.

245 9.9 Galled trees
123
a000
b100
c110
d001
e111123Q(1,3) =
{{a},{b,c},{d },{e}}
Q(2,3) =
{{a,b},{c},{d },{e}}
I(1,3) ={1,2}
I(2,3) ={2}{a,b,c,d}
{b,c}
{c}
{d}
(a) Alignment M (b)IG(S(M)) (c)Qand I (d) Clusters Ce
{a,b,c,d}
{d} {b,c}
{c}a000
 d 001b100
c 110
 e 1111
23a000
 d 001 b100
c 110 e 1111
23
(e) Graph H(Ce) (f ) Attached e (g) Galled tree N
Figure 9.20 For the multiple sequence alignment Mshown in (a), we display the associated incompat-
ibility graph IG(S(M))in (b), and the resulting values for Qand Iin (c). Choosing eto be
the taxon involved in a recombination, we list the associated set of clusters Cein (d). The
associated Hasse diagram H(Ce)is displayed in (e). (f) The network obtained by attaching
the node labeled e. The final galled tree Nis shown in (g).
9.9.2 Allowing multiple galls
LetMbe a condensed multiple alignment of binary sequences on X.I nt h ep r e v i o u s
subsection, we discussed how to construct a recombination network that is a galledtree in the case that the incompatibility graph IG(S(M)) consists of a single non-
trivial connected component. Now, let us assume that the incompatibility graph
IG(S(M)) has more than one connected component.
For each non-trivial connected component CofIG(S(M)), which we refer
to as a subproblem , we construct the multiple sequence alignment M
/primeinduced by
the set of splits contained in the component C.I sM/primecondensed? Clearly, M/primewill
not contain any constant column and also no two columns in M/primewill display the
same pattern of states, because Mis condensed. However, it may happen that two
sequences in M/primeare identical. In the following, we disregard all duplicate sequences
and can therefore assume that the alignment M/primeassociated with any subproblem
Cis condensed.
By deﬁnition, the incompatibility graph IG(S(M/prime)) associated with M/primeconsists
of a single non-trivial connected component. Thus we can apply Lemma 9.9.1 to
determine whether a galled tree exists for M/primea n dt h e nu s eA l g o r i t h m9.9.2 to
construct such a network in the afﬁrmative case.
Once we have established that each subproblem can be solved by a galled tree,
then the next task is to merge all these galled trees using a minor extension ofthe decomposition-based divide-and-conquer strategy described in Section 8.2.A s

246 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
described, the divide-and-conquer strategy assumes that the input data are clustersand then uses a rooted backbone tree to guide the merging process.
If one of the input sequences ais known to be ancestral, then we can use it to
root the backbone tree, thus fulﬁlling the above assumption. If none of the inputsequences is known to be ancestral, then one can proceed by considering all possiblerootings of the backbone tree and for each such rooting, determining whether a
solution to each subproblem can be chosen in a way that is compatible with therooting.
Once we have chosen one recombination network for each non-trivial compo-
nent of the incompatibility graph IG(S(M)) then we merge all networks following
the decomposition-based divide-and-conquer approach described in Section 8.2
and obtain a ﬁnal recombination network NforMonX.
9.9.3 Handling non-condensed alignments
In the previous two subsections we make the simplifying assumption that theconsidered multiple alignment of binary sequences MonXis condensed. T o be
able to drop this assumption, we must discuss how to handle
(i) duplicate sequences,
(ii) constant columns, and
(iii) multiple columns corresponding to the same split.The ﬁrst two cases are easy to deal with. T o accommodate duplicate sequences,ﬁrst run the described algorithm using one representative taxa for each set of taxathat have the same sequence and then add the other taxa as additional labels to thenetwork at the end of the computation. The constant columns are simply ignoredin all calculations.
The third case requires that we modify the method of choosing an appropriate
crossover location [221]. T o this end, consider two columns iand jof a multiple
alignment of binary sequences MonXand assume that i<j.W ed e ﬁ n e
I
/prime(i,j)=/braceleftBig
k|max S−1
i≤k<min S−1
j/bracerightBig
, (9.12)
where S−1
idenotes the set of all positions in Mthat give rise to the same split Sias
column idoes, for any column i. T o ensure that a suitable single crossover position
exists, we require that the last occurrence of a column contained in S−1
icomes
before the ﬁrst occurrence of a column contained in S−1
j.T h i sc a nb et a k e ni n t o
account by replacing condition (ii) of Lemma 9.9.1 by the following more general
condition:(ii’) There exists a single-crossover location:/intersectiontext
(i,j)∈IC(M)I/prime(i,j)/negationslash=∅.

247 9.9 Galled trees
Strain Non-constant sites of alignment
28436 gaccatcacgatgtgggtgggctcctgaacccccaactactttcagacccacctggttgtggcg
28723 ................................................................
29010 ................................................................
2903 ....g......c....................................................
28585 ....g......c....................................................
28718 ....g......c....................................................
25797 t.t.....t..c...a....................................t.a.........
29148 t.t.....t..c...a....................................t.a........a
29020 .g...g.....c........tt....a..............c.tt...tt..t.....a.ca..
26916 .g...g.....c........tt....a..............c.tt...tt..t.....a.ca..
29011 .g...g.....c........tt....a..............c.tt...tt..t.....a.ca..
29105 .g...g.....c........tt....a..............c.tt...tt..t.....a.ca..
26752 ......g...gc....................t...................t...........
26754 ......g..a.c....................t...................tc..........
26755 ......g...gc..a.................t...................t...........
6101 .......g...c.....c....g..........a.................tt..c........
13818 .......g...c.....c....g..........a.................tt..c........
26156 .......g...c.....c....g..........a.................tt..c........
28720 .......g...c.....c....g..........a.................tt..c........
28721 ...................................................tt..c........
5883 ...t.......ca......a..g.t....t......................t...c.......
6394 ...t.......ca......a..g......t......................t...c.......
13383 ...t.......ca......a..g......t.....g................t...c.......
28063 ...t.......c.......a..g......t.g....................t...c.......
28336 ...t.......ca......a..g......t......................t...c.......
28439 ...........c.......a..g......t......................t...c.......
29169 ...t.......c.......a..g......t.g....................t...c.......
O13393 ...........c.c..a.a....t.a.gg.t...g.tcggc.c..cgtt.c.t....c.c..a.
Figure 9.21 The 64non-constant sites of a multiple sequence alignment for the TRI101 gene for
27different strains of F. graminearum and one outgroup sequence O13393 representing
F. lunulosporum (adapted from [ 190 ]).
9.9.4 Application
The phylogeographic structure of lineages of the fungus Fusarium graminearum is
investigated in [ 190]. The paper studies 37 strains and uses the DNA sequence of
six different genes to infer phylogenetic relationships between the strains.
O n er e s u l tr e p o r t e di st h a tt h en u c l e a r3 - O - a c e t y l t r a n s f e r a s eg e n e( TRI101)h a s
undergone intragenic recombination in one of the strains. The data set for thisgene consists of a multiple sequence alignment of 28 DNA sequences of length1336. The DNA sequences represent different strains of F. graminearum and are
identiﬁed by numbers. The strains are partitioned into 7 lineages (1–7) excludingthe strain numbered 28721, which is the recombinant strain. The paper reportsthat the TRI101 sequence for strain 28721 appears to have arisen by recombination
between African lineage 2 and Asian lineage 6.

248 Phylogenetic networks from sequences
26752
26755
26754
25797
29148
28718
2903
28585
28436
2872329010
28721 r
6101
13818
26156
28720
5883
6394
13383
28336
28063
29169
28439
29011
29020
26916
29105
O13393}2
}6qp
Figure 9.22 A recombination network Ncomputed for the multiple sequence alignment of TRI101
sequences listed in Table 9.21. This network suggests that the sequence of taxon 28721
arose by recombination of the lineages labeled 2and 6(data from [190 ]).
In Figure 9.21 we list all non-constant positions of the TRI101 multiple sequence
alignment. As each character in this alignment takes on precisely two different states,the data is binary and can be used as input for the galled tree algorithm.
Application of the described galled tree algorithm establishes that this dataset
can be represented by a recombination network that is a galled tree, as shown inFigure 9.22. Here we see clearly how strain 28721 arises through recombination
from the two lineages 2 and 6. The sequences assigned to the three nodes labeled
p,qand rare as follows:
p=gaccatcacgaCgtgggtgggcCcctgaacccccaactactttcagacccatttgcttgtggcg
q=gaccatcacgatgtgggtgggctcctgaacccccaactactttcagacccaCCtgGttgtggcg
r=gaccatcacgatgtgggtgggctcctgaacccccaactactttcagacccatttgcttgtggcg
T h es e q u e n c e so ft h ep a r e n tn o d e s pandqdiffer from the sequence of the reticulate
node rat positions 12, 23 and 52, 53,56, respectively (emphasized in upper-case).
Hence, the sequence assigned to the reticulate node rcan be obtained from the
sequences assigned to pandqby a single-crossover recombination, whose crossover
point is located anywhere between positions 23 and 52.
Chapter notes
Bandelt’s median network and median-joining method [ 10,11,12]a r ew i d e l y
used in population genetics based on mtDNA and these two approaches are among

249 9.9 Galled trees
the most widely used phylogenetic network methods. They are implemented in aWindows program called Network and have recently been added to the SplitsTreeprogram. The netting method described in [ 80] computes a network that is similar
to a median network. The TCS [ 52] method is also similar to the median network
method in that it attempts to place sequences onto the nodes of a network, inferadditional nodes and label edges by the number of differences between differentsequences.
Work on recombination in the context of population genetics by Jotun Hein and
his co-authors goes far beyond the one approach that we describe in Section 9.8.1,
see, for example, [ 105,106,167,211,222,223,224].
Dan Gusﬁeld’s initial papers on galled trees [ 95,98] generated a lot of interest in
this topic. Other papers in this area include [ 96,97,127,128,221]. The description
of the algorithm in Section 9.9i sb a s e do n[ 95,127, 221]. By developing and
improving lower and upper bounds for the number of recombinations required bya dataset, Song, Wu and Gusﬁeld have developed a new approach that can be used(in theory) to compute a minimal recombination network [ 225]. A new approach
aiming a computing a putative recombination history in practice is presented in[194 ].

10
Phylogenetic networks from distances
Distance methods for phylogenetic trees are widely used because they are usually fastand often perform well in practice. Distance methods for computing phylogeneticnetworks are also usually fast. In this chapter, we ﬁrst recall the concept of aminimum spanning network. We then discuss the two most popular distancemethods, namely split decomposition and the neighbor-net method, and ﬁnally,we describe the T-Rex heuristic.
10.1 Distances and splits
As discussed in Section 3.12, we use the term distance matrix to refer to a distance
function that satisﬁes the symmetry and the triangle inequality conditions, but notnecessarily the identity condition.
LetSbe a set of splits on X. Any split S∈Scan be used to deﬁne a distance
matrix D
SonX, by setting:
dS(x,y)=/braceleftBigg
1i f Sseparates xand y,
0e l s e .(10.1)
for all taxa xand yinX.
We deﬁne the unweighted split metric D SonXas:
dS(x,y)=/summationdisplay
S∈SdS(x,y) (10.2)
for all taxa xand yinX.T h u s dS(x,y) is the number of splits that separate x
and y.
Assume we are given a weighting of the splits, ω:S→R≥0,t h e nw ed e ﬁ n et h e
weighted split metric D (S,ω)as:
d(S,ω)(x,y)=/summationdisplay
S∈Sω(S)×dS(x,y) (10.3)
250

251 10.3 Split decomposition
for all taxa xand yinX. T o reduce notation, both the unweighted and the weighted
split metric are denoted by DS. In other words, we consider unweighted splits as
splits that all have weight one.
LetDbe a distance matrix on X. We say that a set of positively weighted splits
SonXrepresents D ,i fDS=D. Additionally, in this case, if Nis a split network
representing S,t h e nw ea l s os a yt h a t Nr e p r e s e n t sD . If a split network Nrepresents
D, then for any two taxa xand ywe have that the distance d(x,y)e q u a l st h es u mo f
edge lengths of any shortest path from the node labeled xt ot h en o d el a b e l e d yinN.
Note that a distance matrix Dis additive if and only if it can be represented
by a set of of positively weighted splits Sthat is compatible, which can in turn be
represented by an unrooted phylogenetic tree.
10.2 Minimum spanning networks
LetG=(V,E,ω)b eac o n n e c t e dg r a p hw i t hn o d es e t Vand edge set E,t o g e t h e r
with an edge weighting ω:E→R≥0that assigns a non-negative number to all
edges. In Section 9.6.1 we describe an algorithm for computing the minimum
spanning network for G(see Algorithm 9.6.1).
Assume that we are given a distance matrix DonX. For example, the distances
might be the Hamming distances obtained from a multiple sequence alignment M
onX.L e t G=(V,E) be the complete graph on Xw h o s ee d g e sa r ew e i g h t e db y
the given distances between taxa. The minimum spanning network Nassociated
with Gcan be used to represent the distances between the taxa in X. Although the
method is not used in phylogenetics, it is used in population genetics, as describedin the following subsection.
10.2.1 Application
In [176], the patterns of inter-population genetic diversity in a migratory bat
species, Miniopterus schreibersii natalensis, are studied to determine how much
population substructure is present. While bats and birds have traditionally shownminimal population substructure, this work shows strong population substructureand philopatry in both sexes, as indicated by concordance of nuclear and mtDNAﬁndings. The authors argue that the genetic structure correlates with local biomesand differentiation in wing morphology. They use a minimum spanning networkon 55 unique mtDNA control region sequences to show that the sequences clusterinto three regional subpopulations, see Figure 10.1.
10.3 Split decomposition
Given a distance matrix DonX, the split decomposition method produces a set
of weighted splits S, as described in detail in Section 5.9. The set of splits is weakly

252 Phylogenetic networks from distances
SW
3200 kmMM2MM4
MM6
G2MM1MM6
G5
SHD
2MM5
G1G7
SW
7 SW4SW8SKK
1
SKK3
KB2KB3SKK
2
KB
1SW
2SW
6
SW
9PC
1PC
3PC2
KB7
KB5KB6
PC5
SW12JD
5SKK
4SKK
5
SKK
6
KB
4DHP
7
DHP4
DHL6DHL
7
DHP3DHP5
DHP
1DHL1DHL5DHP2DHP6DHL
4SW
10G
3G6
SHD5
MM
3SHD
4SHD
1JD
1SHD
8PC
6PC
4JD4
SW1G6
SHD7JD
3SHD
6
SHD
3
JD6
G4JD
2MM
7JD
8
SW
5JD
7SW
11
DHL
2DHL
3
Figure 10.1 Minimum spanning network for 55unique mtDNA control region sequence haplotypes
identified in bat (M. s. natalensis ) colonies, superimposed over a map of South Africa [ 176 ].
Haplotypes are clustered into three regional subpopulations: southern (shown in white),western (black) and northeastern (gray). Differences along an edge are indicated by cross-hatches. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, 424:187–191,
c/circlecopyrt2003.
compatible, but not necessarily compatible, and thus gives rise to a split networkthat is not necessarily a phylogenetic tree. The splits approximate the distancesinDfrom below, that is, we have d(x,y)≥/summationtext
S∈S(x,y)ω(S) for all pairs of taxa
x,y∈X,w h e r e S(x,y) denotes the set of all splits in Sthat separate xand y.F o r
ease of reference we summarize the algorithm again here [ 9]:
Algorithm 10.3.1 (Split decomposition) Given a distance matrix D on X=
{x1,..., xn}, to compute the set of all D-splits on X, proceed as follows:
Initially, set X1={x1}andS1=∅. Now, assume we have computed the set of splits
Sion the ﬁrst i taxa Xi={x1,..., xi}.T oo b t a i n Si+1onXi+1={x1,..., xi+1},
for each splitA
B∈Sido:
(i)Consider S =A∪{xi+1}
B.I fαD(S)>0,s e tω(S)=αD(S)and add S to Si+1.
(ii)Consider S =A
B∪{xi+1}.I fαD(S)>0,s e tω(S)=αD(S)and add S to Si+1.
(iii) Consider S =Xi
{xi+1}.I fαD(S)>0,s e tω(S)=αD(S)and add S to Si+1.
The result is given by Sn.

253 10.3 Split decomposition
PL VvagmPL Vlhoest
PL Vcol
PL Vcpz
PL VsykPL Vsmm
Figure 10.2 A split decomposition network computed for a dataset of primate lentiviruses, as described
in the text, adapted from [ 209 ]. Names at the tips of the network represent monophyletic
groups. Internal edges have a bootstrap support between 85% and 100%.
As discussed in Section 5.9, the isolation index αD(S) of a split S=A
Bis deﬁned as
1
2minw,x∈A
y,z∈B(max{d(w,x)+d(y,z),d(w,y)+d(x,z),d(w,z)
+d(x,y)}− d(w,x)−d(y,z)). (10.4)
A split network representing this set of splits can be computed using the convexhull algorithm (see Algorithm 7.1.4). The resulting split networks are often quite
close to being planar, since the set of D-splits is weakly compatible.
10.3.1 Application
Split decomposition has been used in several studies and on a wide range of differentbiological data.
For example, in [209] the authors use split decomposition (and other methods)
to investigate the relationships among six primate lentivirus (PLV) lineages forwhich full genome sequences are available. For this group, six monophyletic cladeshave been identiﬁed, but uncertainty remains about the phylogenetic relationshipsamong these six major PLV lineages.
Distances were obtained from sequence alignments by the “GTR+ /Gamma1+I” model of
nucleotide substitution using only ﬁrst and second codon positions. Taxa belongingto a monophyletic clade were grouped and analyzed as a single taxonomic unit andthe average distance from each group to any other was computed using the groupoption in SplitsTree, see Section 14.1. One thousand bootstrap replicates were
generated to assess the reliability of each edge in the network. The resulting networkis shown in Figure 10.2. This network conﬁrms that the dataset contains conﬂicting
phylogenetic signals and is consistent with the hypothesis of early recombination

254 Phylogenetic networks from distances
events among the major lineages, which is supported in the paper by several otherresults, as well.
10.4 Neighbor-net
The neighbor-net method takes as input a distance matrix DonXand produces
as output a collection of weighted splits SonX[32]. As we shall see, the produced
set of splits is circular, that is, there exists a circular ordering ( x1,x2,..., xn)o ft h e
taxaXsuch that every split S∈Sis of the form
S={xp,xp+1,..., xq}
X−{xp,..., xq}(10.5)
for some pair of indices pand qwith 1 <p≤q≤n. The resulting set of splits S
is then given to the circular network algorithm described in Section 7.2to compute
an actual split network N.
As we saw in Section 5.7, circularity implies that Scan be represented by an
outer-labeled planar split network, that is, a split network drawn in the plane insuch a way that no two edges cross and all taxon labels occur around the outsideo ft h en e t w o r k .T h er e s u l t i n gn e t w o r k sa r en o to v e r l yc o m p l i c a t e da n dt h a ti sone reason why neighbor-net is a popular method for constructing phylogeneticnetworks.
A distance matrix DonXis called circular , if it equals the weighted split
metric of some circular set of splits SonX. The relationship between the input
distance matrix Dand the splits produced by neighbor-net is given by the following
result:Theorem 10.4.1 (Consistency of neighbor-net) Let D be a distance matrix on X.
The set of weighted splits Scomputed by neighbor-net represent D (exactly) if and
only if D is circular.The proof of this result is quite technical and can be found in [33].
Because compatible splits are always circular, it follows that the neighbor-net
method always computes the correct phylogenetic tree, given a distance matrix thatis additive.
On real biological data, the obtained distance matrices usually do not fulﬁll the
four-point condition and are also not circular. Nevertheless, just as the neighbor-j o i n i n gm e t h o di su s e dt oc o m p u t et r e e sf r o md i s t a n c em a t r i c e se v e nw h e nt h ef o u r -point condition is not satisﬁed, it is also common practice to apply the neighbor-neta l g o r i t h me v e nw h e nc i r c u l a r i t yi sn o tg i v e n .T h eh o p ei st h a td e v i a t i o n sf r o mt h erequired conditions do not distort the result too much.

255 10.4 Neighbor-net
x3
x4
x5 x6x1x2x3
x4
x5 x6x2
) b ( ) a (
Figure 10.3 (a) Initially, the graph Gconsidered in the neighbor-net algorithm consists of one node for
each taxon, illustrated here for X={x1,..., x6}. (b) Before and after every iteration of the
main algorithm, the graph Gconsists only of singles (isolated nodes) and couples (pairs of
connected nodes).
Given a distance matrix DonX,t h eneighbor-net method proceeds in two steps:
(i) The main computation is to determine a circular ordering ZofX, using an
iterative algorithm similar to neighbor-joining.
(ii) Then a set of weighted splits Sis computed that respect the circular ordering
Z.
In the following, we discuss each step in detail.
10.4.1 Computation of a circular ordering
Given a distance matrix DonX, neighbor-net uses an iterative algorithm to
compute a circular ordering for X. The algorithm maintains a graph Gand an
auxiliary distance matrix Fon the nodes of the graph.
Initialization: The nodes of Gare set to X(See Figure 10.3a) and the distance
matrix Fis set to D. No new nodes are generated during execution of the algorithm
and so nodes in the graph always correspond directly to taxa in X.
Iteration: At the beginning of the i-th iteration, the graph Gconsists of two types
of connected components, namely isolated nodes, which we call singles , and pairs
of connected nodes, which we call couples (see Figure 10.3b). The distance matrix
Fdeﬁnes a distance between each pair of nodes xand y.
The algorithm proceeds by choosing two components that have minimum dis-
tance from each other and then merging these to produce a new couple. We discusshow the distances between components are deﬁned further below, after we havediscussed the process of merging in detail.
Note that there are three possible combinations of pairs of components, namely:
(M1) two singles,(M2) a single and a couple, or(M3) two couples.
We shall discuss each case in turn (see Figure 10.4).

256 Phylogenetic networks from distances
(M1) Single–single:
x y → x y → x y
) c ( ) b ( ) a (
(M2) Single–couple:
→xy
zxyz
→ x z
) f ( ) e ( ) d (
(M3) Couple–couple:
(g)→x
wzy x
wyz
w
xzy w
xyz→ w z
(i)
(h)
Figure 10.4 The three different cases considered in the main iteration of neighbor-net: Case (M1):
(a) Two singles are to be merged. (b) There is only one configuration to be considered.(c) The result is a couple. Case (M2): (d) A single and a couple are to be merged. (e) Thereare two different orientations of the couple to consider. (f) The result is one couple. Case(M3): (g) Two couples are to be merged. (h) There are two different orientations for eachcomponent to be considered, giving rise to four possible combinations. (i) Again, the resultis one couple. Dotted lines indicate which pairs of taxa are recorded as neighbors.
In case (M1), to merge two singles, xand y, the algorithm simply deﬁnes a
new edge between xand y. Moreover, the algorithm records that xand yare
neighbors .
In case (M2), the two components are a single, x, and a couple, containing two
nodes yand z. The algorithm deletes the node in the couple that is closest to x,
based on a distance calculation that we describe further below. Assume, withoutloss of generality, that the deleted node is y, then the algorithm constructs a new
couple by placing an edge between the two nodes xand z. The algorithm records
that the two taxa xand yareneighbors .
In case (M3), the two components are both couples, one containing two nodes
wand x, and the other containing two other nodes yand z. The algorithm deletes
o n en o d ef r o me a c hc o m p o n e n t ,n a m e l yt h et w ot h a ta r ec l o s e s tt oe a c ho t h e r ,a sdiscussed below, and then constructs a new couple from the remaining two nodes.Assuming, without loss of generality that the two nodes that are deleted are xand
y, then the algorithm records xand yasneighbors .

257 10.4 Neighbor-net
The algorithm repeatedly merges pairs of components in this way until all
possible components have been merged into a single component, which is a couple.Letz
1and z2denote the two nodes contained in the remaining couple.
Note that each time we merge two components, two taxa are recorded as neigh-
bors. More precisely, each taxon (except z1and z2) is reported as the neighbor of
some other node exactly twice. It is ﬁrst reported as a neighbor when it ﬁrst entersinto a couple, either as the node xoryin case (M1) or as xin case (M2). It is again
reported as a neighbor when it is deleted from the graph, either as node yin case
(M2) or as node xoryin case (M3). The two remaining taxa z
1and z2each have
only one neighbor. Hence, the reported neighbor relations form a chain from z1to
z2containing all taxa in X. This deﬁnes a linear ordering ZofX.
Computing the distances
T o complete the description of the ﬁrst part of the algorithm, we need to describehow to deﬁne the distances between components of the graph G,h o wt od e t e r m i n e
which pair of nodes from two different clusters are closest to each other and howto update the distance matrix Fwhenever the graph Ghas changed.
Assume that the graph Ghas connected components C
1,C2,..., Cmand con-
sider two such components Ciand Cj. The distance d(Ci,Cj)b e t w e e n Ciand
Cjis deﬁned as the average distance between the nodes contained in the two
components, given by
d(Ci,Cj)=1
|Ci||Cj|/summationdisplay
x∈Ci/summationdisplay
y∈CjF(x,y). (10.6)
However, to decide which two components to merge, as in the neighbor-joiningmethod, the algorithm does not pick a pair of components that minimize thisdistance, but rather it chooses a pair of components that minimize the adjusteddistance
d
/prime(Ci,Cj)=d(Ci,Cj)−(ri+rj), (10.7)
with
ri=1
m−2m/summationdisplay
k=1,k/negationslash=id(Ci,Ck). (10.8)
S u p p o s et h a tc o m p o n e n t s CiandCjminimize the distance d/prime. In the cases (M2)
and (M3) we need to determine which pair of nodes from Ciand Cjare closest
to each other. This is done using the same distance calculation as for components,but treating all nodes contained in C
iand Cjas singles. More precisely, we choose

258 Phylogenetic networks from distances
ap a i ro fn o d e s xi∈Ciand xj∈Cjthat minimize:
ˆd/prime(xi,xj)=F(xi,xj)−(ˆri+ˆrj), (10.9)
with
ˆri=1
ˆm−2ˆm/summationdisplay
k=1,k/negationslash=id(xi,Ck), (10.10)
where ˆm=m+|Ci|+| Cj|−2 is the number of clusters present when all nodes
inCiand Cjare treated as singles.
After applying one of the three merging steps, the distance matrix Fmust be
updated to reﬂect the fact that the graph Ghas changed. In case (M1), an edge
is added to the graph, but no nodes are deleted and so in this case the matrix F
remains unaltered.
In case (M2), a conﬁguration of three nodes x,yand zis replaced by a couple
consisting of xand z. In this case, we compute new distances F/primebetween xorz
and every node wstill in the graph Gas follows:
F/prime(x,w)=2
3F(x,w)+1
3F(y,w), (10.11)
F/prime(z,w)=2
3F(z,w)+1
3F(y,w) and (10.12)
F/prime(x,z)=1
3(F(x,y)+F(x,z)+F(y,z)). (10.13)
In case (M3), a conﬁguration of four nodes w,x,yand zis replaced by a couple
consisting of wand z. T o update the distances in this case, we ﬁrst apply the update
just described to nodes x,yandzand remove y. We then apply the same calculation
to nodes w,xand z, before removing x.
10.4.2 Computing the weighted splits
Let Dbe a distance matrix on X. Above we discussed how the neighbor-net
algorithm computes a linear ordering ZofXfrom D.I nt h i ss e c t i o n ,w ed e s c r i b e
how Zis used to produce a set of weighted splits S.
T o begin, construct the set of all splits that respect the linear ordering Z=
(x1,x2,..., xn)a s
S=/braceleftbigg{xp,xp+1,..., xq}
X−{xp,..., xq}|1<p≤q≤n/bracerightbigg
. (10.14)
The set of splits Sdeﬁned in this way is circular and Zis a circular ordering for S
(see Deﬁnition 5.7.1).

259 10.4 Neighbor-net
The weights of these splits are chosen using the least squares method . T o this end,
we represent the distance matrix Das ann(n−1)
2-dimensional vector
d=d12
d13
...
d(n−1)n (10.15)
of pairwise distances between distinct taxa, where d
ij=d(xi,xj) is the distance
between taxa xiand xj.
The set of splits S={S1,..., Sk}is represented by an ( m×k) matrix A(with
m=n(n−1)
2) in which each row represents a pair of taxa xi,xjand each column
represents a split St.W es e t
A(ij)t=/braceleftBigg
1i f xiand xjare separated by St,
0e l s e .(10.16)
Letbbe the k-dimensional vector representing the weights of the splits. Then
the ordinary least square estimate of bis given by
b=(ATA)−1ATd. (10.17)
The ordinary least squares calculation is not ideally suited to the task of estimatingthe weights of splits because some values of the solution may be negative.
Simply removing all splits that are assigned negative weights does not solve this
problem because the weights of the remaining splits may be severely overestimated,leading to a phylogenetic network Nthat is both overly complicated and also a bad
ﬁt to the distance matrix D.
The answer is to impose a non-negativity constraint [ 32]. There is no closed for-
mula for constrained least square estimates and enforcing the constraint increasesthe computation time considerably. However, the resulting split network is usuallymuch cleaner and provides a more accurate representation of D.
The output of this part of the neighbor-net method is the set of all weighted
splits in Sthat have a positive weight.
10.4.3 Constructing an outer-labeled planar split network
As we have seen, given a distance matrix DonX,t h eo u t p u to ft h en e i g h b o r - n e t
method is a set of weighted splits Sand a circular ordering Zof the taxa for S.
The set of splits Sand the circular ordering Zare passed to the circular network
algorithm (see Section 7.2) to compute an actual network Nthat is guaranteed
to be outer-labeled planar. The neighbor-net method is implemented in SplitsTree(see Section 14.1).

260 Phylogenetic networks from distances
Figure 10.5 A split network for 44 Vietnamese chicken populations [ 19] computed using the neighbor-
net method. Four of the domestic chicken populations (encircled) appear isolated from theother ones and more closely related to wild populations. Reprinted from BMC Genetics 10:1(2009) under the Creative Commons Attribution License.
10.4.4 Application
In [19] the relationship between wild and domestic chicken is examined. The
authors assume that hybridization between wild and domestic chickens may haveoccurred in Ha Giang, Vietnam, leading to a high genetic diversity. In a splitnetwork on 44 Vietnamese chicken populations, computed using Latter’s geneticdistances and the neighbor-net method, four of the domestic chicken populations(encircled in Figure 10.5)a p p e a ri s o l a t e df r o mt h eo t h e rd o m e s t i cp o p u l a t i o n s
and more closely related to the wild populations, supporting an hypothesis ofadmixture between the two.
10.4.5 Discussion
Neighbor-net is an attractive method for computing split networks for the followingreasons: First, the resulting networks are outer-labeled planar and thus easy to drawand to read. Secondly, the algorithm is quite fast. Thirdly, it produces resolvednetworks even for quite large numbers of taxa, unlike the split decompositionmethod, which rapidly loses resolution as the number of taxa increases.

261 10.5 T-Rex
10.5 T-Rex
Most algorithms presented in this book produce either an unrooted phylogeneticnetwork that is a split network or a rooted phylogenetic network that is a rootedDAG. One of the few exceptions is the T-Rex algorithm [162 ,172]. This method
takes as input a distance matrix DonXand produces as output an unrooted
phylogenetic network Nthat consists of an unrooted phylogenetic tree on X,
augmented by a set of short-cut edges , which are auxiliary edges that are added
to produce a better ﬁt between distances in Nand the input distances D.M o r e
precisely, the output is a network that fulﬁlls the following deﬁnition:Deﬁnition 10.5.1 (Reticulogram) Areticulogram R=(V,E,F,ω)is an
unrooted phylogenetic network on Xthat consists of an unrooted phylogenetic tree
T=(V,E),as e to fshort-cut edges Fa n d a m a p ω:E∪F→
R≥0that assigns a
length to every edge in R.LetRbe a reticulogram on X.T h ereticulogram distance matrix D
Ris deﬁned for
any two taxa xand yasdR(x,y), the minimum sum of edge lengths on any path
from the node λ(x)t ot h en o d e λ(y)i n R.
The basic idea of the T-Rex algorithm is to ﬁrst compute a phylogenetic tree from
the given input distance matrix D, using a method such as neighbor-joining, and
then to greedily add short-cut edges to the tree so as to improve the least squaresﬁt between the reticulogram distances and the input distances.Algorithm 10.5.2 (T-Rex algorithm) Let D be a distance matrix on X. To construct
a reticulogram R on X, proceed as follows. First, compute a phylogenetic tree T for D
using the neighbor-joining algorithm and set R =T. Second, while the goodness-of-
ﬁtbetween the reticulogram distances D
Rand the input distances D can be improved,
do the following:
(i)For each pair of nodes vandwthat are not connected by an edge: Determine
the optimal length ω(e)for the candidate short-cut edge e ={v,w}and then
compute the improvement /Delta1(e)of the least-square ﬁt that would be gained by
adding e to R.
(ii)Add the candidate edge e that maximizes /Delta1(e)to R.
T o fully specify this algorithm, we must answer two questions: (1) How to calculatethe optimal length ω(e) for a prospective short-cut edge e?( 2 )H o wt od e t e r m i n e
the goodness-of-ﬁt between D
Rand D?
T o answer the ﬁrst question, let vandwbe a pair nodes that are not yet connected
by an edge e={v,w}inR. The ﬁrst step is to determine all pairs of taxa sand t
for which the distance dR(s,t) might possibly change if we were to add the edge
etoR. Clearly, the distance between a pair of taxa sand tcan only change if

262 Phylogenetic networks from distances
dR(s,t)>ω (e). T o ﬁnd all such pairs, for the moment, let us assume that the
length of eisω(e)=0, as this is the most inclusive choice.
Upon adding etoR, for any pair of taxa sand tthe new distance from λ(s)t o
λ(t) would be given by:
min/braceleftbig
dR(s,t),dR(s,v)+dR(w,t),dR(s,w)+dR(v,t)/bracerightbig
. (10.18)
Hence, the distance can only change for those pairs of taxa sand tfor which the
following inequality holds:
min/braceleftbig
dR(s,v)+dR(w,t),dR(s,w)+dR(v,t)/bracerightbig
<dR(s,t). (10.19)
We use A(v,w ) to denote the set of all pairs of taxa ( s,t) that satisfy this con-
dition. Our next goal is to partition A(v,w ) into a collection of sets A1(v,w ),
A2(v,w ),... containing all pairs of taxa whose distances may be affected by
adding etoR, for different possible lengths of e.
T o this end, we ﬁrst consider all pairs of taxa ( s,t)∈A(v,w ) that minimize the
following difference:
dR(s,t)−min/braceleftbig
dR(s,v)+dR(w,t),dR(s,w)+dR(v,t)/bracerightbig
. (10.20)
We use /lscript1(v,w ) to denote the minimum and we deﬁne A1(v,w )a st h es e to f
all pairs of taxa in A(v,w ) for which the minimum is attained. Note that the
reticulogram distance between pairs in this group can only change if the length ofeis less than /lscript
1(v,w ).
Now, assume that we have already deﬁned the sets A1(v,w ),..., Aj(v,w )a n d
that there still is at least one pair of taxa in A(v,w ) that is not contained in
one of these sets. Then we deﬁne Aj+1(v,w ) as the set of all pairs of taxa in
A(v,w )−/uniontextj
i=1Ai(v,w ) that minimize the expression given in Equation (10.20),
with/lscriptj+1(v,w ) deﬁned as the attained minimum.
At the end of this process, A(v,w ) is partitioned into sets A1(v,w ),
A2(v,w ),..., Am(v,w ), for some number m≥1, and each such set has an
associated value /lscript1(v,w )</lscript 2(v,w )···</lscript m(v,w ). T o determine the optimal
length ω(e), we consider each interval of values Ij=[/lscriptj(v,w ),/lscript j+1(v,w )] (with
0≤j<m) in turn and determine the best choice for each interval.
What is the best choice of ω(e) restricted to such an interval Ij?I ft h el e n g t ho f
the new edge eis between /lscriptj(v,w )a n d/lscriptj+1(v,w ), then only distances between
pairs of taxa (s ,t) contained in/uniontextm
i=j+1Ai(v,w ) can change. As the aim of this
algorithm is to minimize the least-squares ﬁt between the input distances Dand
the reticulate distances DR,w ec h o o s eω j(e) such that it minimizes
m/summationdisplay
i=j+1/summationdisplay
(s,t)∈Ai(v,w )(/lscripti(v,w )+ωj(e)−D(s,t))2. (10.21)

263 10.5 T-Rex
a cde f
b1
1
1 11112 2
2abcdef
a 024454
b 204454
c 440245
d 442045
e 554405
f 445550acde f
b
(a) Reticulogram R (b) Distances DR (c)RTRex (DR)
Figure 10.6 (a) A reticulogram RonX={a,..., e}with edges labeled by their lengths. (b) The distance
matrix DRonXthat is defined by R. (c) The reticulogram RTRex (DR)obtained by applying
the T-Rex algorithm to DR. Solid lines represent the initial unrooted phylogenetic tree and
the dashed line indicates the added short-cut edge.
An o n t r i v i a ls o l u t i o ni sg i v e nb y
ωj(e)=/summationtextm
i=j+1/summationtext
(s,t)∈Ai(v,w )(D(s,t)−/lscripti(v,w ))/summationtextm
i=j+1|Ai(v,w )|, (10.22)
which we must then also compare with the two boundary values /lscriptj(v,w )a n d
/lscriptj+1(v,w ).
Once we have obtained an optimal edge length for every interval Ij, for each
such choice ωj(e) we compute the total least-square ﬁt between the input distances
Dand the reticulogram distances DR, the latter computed in the presence of the
edge ewith length ωj(e). Then ω(e)i ss e tt ot h ev a l u eω j(e) that optimizes the
least-squares ﬁt over all j=1,..., m−1.
How to measure the goodness-of-ﬁt between Dand DRto help decide whether
more short-cut edges should be added to the network? This is done using thequadratic difference Q(D,D
R)=/summationtext
a,b∈X(d(a,b)−dR(a,b))2between the two
distance matrices, set into relation with the number nof taxa and the number kof
e d g e si nt h en e t w o r k R, in some way. One possibility is to deﬁne the ﬁtbetween D
and DRas
ﬁt(D,DR)=Q(D,DR)
(2n−2)(2 n−3)
2−2k. (10.23)
The aim of the T-Rex approach is to compute a reticulogram RonXwhose
distances DRprovide a good ﬁt to a given input distance matrix DonX. Unfortu-
nately, it is easy to construct a reticulogram RonXsuch that the T-Rex algorithm
will fail to compute the “correct” reticulogram from the distance matrix DR.I n
Figure 10.6, we display a reticulogram RonX={a,...,e }and its distance matrix
DR.W ea l s os h o wt h er e t i c u l o g r a m RTRex(DR) computed by the T-Rex algorithm
(using the web-server http://www.trex.uqam.ca), which provides only an imperfect
ﬁt to the distance matrix DR.

264 Phylogenetic networks from distances
There are two main reasons for such failures. First, the initial distances computed
by the tree reconstruction method (for example neighbor-joining) are aimed atproviding a good ﬁt to a tree and are not designed for subsequent ﬁtting of the datato a network. In particular, some of the tree distances will under-ﬁt the distancesbetween taxa, and such errors are not addressed by the algorithm. A second problemis that the T-Rex algorithm only allows short-cut edges between existing nodes.
10.5.1 Application
An application of the T-Rex approach can be found in [ 85], where the phylogenetic
relationships inside the Fagus sylvatica species complex in Europe and western Asia
are studied. For each of 279 local subpopulations (represented by a sample of 50–280 individuals), data from 12 allozyme loci were collected. Employing a distancematrix inferred from the sequences using Nei’s distance transform [ 187], the paper
presents a reticulogram calculated by T-Rex and also a neighbor-net network.The two networks are cited as evidence that a substantial taxonomic revision isnecessary for F. sylvatica . Moreover, the two networks are said to provide a better
insight into the phylogenetic relationships among the components of this group.For example, both networks suggest a strong genetic similarity of the Calabria andBalkan populations, conﬁrming prior studies and readily explained by the existenceof a land-bridge over the Otranto Strait, which disappeared at the beginning ofthe Pliocene. However, in some cases the reticulogram displays dubious edgesconnecting geographically distant populations for which a contact in the past washardly possible and which are separated by other regional populations.
Chapter notes
The split decomposition method [9] was the ﬁrst method for computing unrootedphylogenetic networks from distances and has been used in many studies, particu-larly for data that are not expected to be tree-like, such as in the evolution of viruses[114, 147], or, to cite a non-biological example, in the “evolution” of manuscripts
that were copied by hand [ 14,226]. The neighbor-net method [ 31]i sm o r ew i d e l y
used than the split decomposition method, due to the fact that it shows much betterresolution on larger and more conﬂicting datasets. A recent paper discusses the useof neighbor-net as a tool for metagenome comparison [ 177]. For a discussion of
strengths and weaknesses of the methods presented in this chapter, see [ 180].

11
Phylogenetic networks from trees
In this chapter, we look at a number of methods that take as input one or morephylogenetic trees and compute as output a phylogenetic network. We ﬁrst discussmethods for computing consensus trees and consensus split networks from unrooted
phylogenetic trees, and then brieﬂy touch on doing the same for rooted phyloge-netic trees. We then present an algorithm for computing a minimum hybridization
network for two trees. The two last topics in this section both address the issue
of gene duplications. First we discuss how to compute a phylogenetic networkfor a given multi-labeled phylogenetic tree. Then we discuss an approach used for
computing an optimal duplication-loss-transfer scenario that reconciles a gene tree
with a species tree.
11.1 Consensus split networks
Assume that we are given a collection T=(T1,..., Tk) of unrooted phylogenetic
trees on X. They might be different phylogenetic trees inferred for different genes,
a collection of trees obtained for a single gene using a number of different treeinference methods or a list of trees produced via bootstrapping or a samplingapproach, for example.
Such a collection of unrooted phylogenetic trees Tis often represented by a single
consensus tree, as discussed in Section 3.17. Recall that two standard approaches
to computing a consensus tree both start by determining the splits associated witheach tree in T, and then either consider the set S
strict(T) of all splits that occur in
every tree, or consider the set Smajority (T) of all splits that occur in more than half
of the trees. The unrooted phylogenetic tree Tstrictassociated with the former set of
splitsSstrict(T) is known as the strict consensus tree, whereas the latter set of splits
Smajority (T) gives rise to the majority consensus tree Tmajority .
Now, more generally, let us consider the set Sp(T) of all splits that are present
in more than a proportion pof all unrooted phylogenetic trees T=(T1,..., Tk)
265

266 Phylogenetic networks from trees
a
b cef d
a
d bef c
b
a def c
(a) Tree Tree Tree
Tree Tree TreeT1 (b) T2 (c) T3
a
b def c
a
d cef b
a
c def b
(d) T4 (e) T5 (f ) T6
a
c defb
a
c def
b
a
b defc
a def
c
b
(g) Majority (h)d=2 (i)d=5 (j) All splits
Figure 11.1 (a)–(f) Six different phylogenetic trees T1,..., T6onX={a,b,c,d,e,f}. (g) Their majority
consensus tree and (h) their consensus split network for d=2, representing all splits that
are present in more than1
3of the trees. Note that in this case the network is still a tree, but
more resolved than the majority consensus tree. (i) The consensus split network for d=5
and (j) the split network representing all splits present in the six trees.
onX, for some ﬁxed value of p,w i t h0 ≤p<1, deﬁned as
Sp(T)=/braceleftbigg
S∈S(T):|{T∈T:S∈S(T)}|
|T|>p/bracerightbigg
. (11.1)
Then, clearly S1
2(T)=Smajority (T) and thus S1
2(T) is compatible. Moreover, for
p>1
2we have Sp(T)⊆S(T)1
2, and so Sp(T) is compatible for any choice of
pabove1
2.
Consider Sp(T) for a value of pthat is less than1
2. In this case, the splits in
Sp(T) need not be compatible and so the graphical representation of Sp(T)m i g h t
n o tb eap h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e Tbut rather a more general split network N,w h i c hw e
call a consensus split network in this context [ 113]:
Deﬁnition 11.1.1 (Consensus split network) Assume that we are given a set T
of phylogenetic trees on Xand an integer d >1. We deﬁne the (d-dimensional)
consensus split network Nf o rTas the split network that represents S(1
d+1)(T).
First, note that the proportion used in the deﬁnition is p=1
d+1. Moreover, since
we assume d>1, we have 0 <1
d+1≤1
2and so the proportion plies between 0 and
at most1
2. What is the interpretation of the parameter d? It prescribes the maximal

267 11.1 Consensus split networks
S. cerevisiaeS. paradoxusS. bayanusS. kudriavzevii
S. mikatae S. kluyveriS. castelli
C. albicans
S. cerevisiae
S. mikataeS. kudriavzeviiS. bayanus
S. castelli
S. kluyveriC. albicansS. paradoxus
(a) Split network N0 (b) Consensus network N0.05
S. cerevisiaeS. paradoxus
S. kluyveriC. albicansS. castelliS. bayanus S. kudriavzevii
S. mikataeS. cerevisiae
S. mikataeS. kudriavzeviiS. bayanus
S. castelli
S. kluyveriC. albicansS. paradoxus
(c) Consensus network N0.30 (d) Majority tree T
Figure 11.2 For a set Tof106phylogenetic trees on eight yeast species reported in [206 ], we show three
split networks (a) N0,( b ) N0.05and (c) N0.30that represent all splits that occur in at least
one input tree, in more than 5%of all trees, and in more than 30% of all trees, respectively.
In (d) we show the majority consensus tree for T.
dimensionality of the consensus split network N:F o rd =1, we have p=1
2and
the consensus split network is one-dimensional, namely a phylogenetic tree (themajority consensus tree). For d=2, the consensus split network may be “two-
dimensional” and contain “parallelograms” , that is, undirected cycles of length 4.Ford=3, the consensus split network may contain (the edge skeletons of) cubes
of dimension ≤3, and so on. In Figure 11.1 we see that the maximal dimensionality
is not always attained: for example, for d=2 the displayed consensus split network
is a tree, whereas for d=5, the network is only “two-dimensional” .
A consensus tree has a nice interpretation as representing those parts of a evo-
lutionary history on which a set of phylogenetic trees agree on. Parts for which thetrees provide incompatible accounts are suppressed and are represented by unre-solved nodes in the consensus. A consensus split network can be used to representthose incompatible alternative scenarios that are supported by a good proportionof the input trees.
However, in many cases the well-supported alternatives are often caused by sim-
ple local rearrangements around individual nodes in the trees. Other, more inter-esting incompatibilities, for instance, caused by a major horizontal gene transferevent, are often missing from the consensus split network, because such eventsusually involve only one or a few genes.

268 Phylogenetic networks from trees
11.1.1 Application
One of the ﬁrst published applications of the consensus split network methodwas to a collection of 106 different unrooted phylogenetic trees involving eightdifferent yeast species. The input trees were published in [ 206] where the main
goal was to investigate the issue of incongruence among gene trees and to considerpotential methods for resolving it. In [ 112], a consensus network for the 106 trees
representing all splits that occur in at least 21% of all trees was presented (not“ i nm o r et h a nt e nt r e e s ” ,a se r r o n e o u s l yr e p o r t e di nt h ep a p e r ) .I nF i g u r e 11.2 we
show tree split networks N
0,N0.05and N0.30forp=0,p=0.05 and p=0.30,
respectively. Additionally, we show the majority consensus tree. In these drawings,the length of an edge is scaled to represent the number of trees that support thecorresponding split. This ﬁgure shows clearly that there is some disagreementamong the gene trees as to where the outgroup taxon Candida albicans attaches
to the phylogeny, the two main choices being an attachment to either the lineageleading to Saccharomyces castelli or to S. kluyveri . There is some disagreement
concerning how to arrange the other ﬁve taxa, the largest contention being whetherS. kudriavzevii and S. bayanus are sister taxa.
In the depicted consensus tree, the majority of gene trees place C. albicans as a
sister of S. kluyveri and the information that a signiﬁcant number of genes prefer
an alternative placement is suppressed.
11.2 Consensus super split networks for unrooted trees
The above approach to calculating consensus trees and consensus split networksrequires that all input trees are on exactly the same set of taxa X.H o w e v e r ,i n
practice, it often occurs that some (or even all) of the input trees lack some of themembers of the total taxon set X. For example, when studying multiple gene trees,
particular gene sequences may be absent for certain taxa. In this section, we discusshow to address this problem.
LetXbe a set of taxa. A phylogenetic tree TonX
/primeis called a partial tree onX,
ifX/primeis a subset of X. Similarly, any split on X/prime⊂Xis called a partial split onX.
A split that contains all members of Xis sometimes called a complete split on X,
for emphasis.
A key question is how to extend partial splits so that they become complete splits.
As we shall see, one answer is given by the Z-closure method, which takes a set of
partial splits on Xas input and infers a set of complete splits on Xas output. Such
a set of complete splits can then be used to compute consensus trees and consensussplit networks [ 126].
Consider a set Sof partial splits on X. Two partial splits S
1=A1
B1∈Sand
S2=A2
B2∈Sare said to be in Z-relation to each other, if exactly one of the four

269 11.2 Consensus super split networks for unrooted trees
intersections A1∩A2,A1∩B2,B1∩A2orB1∩B2is empty. In this case, if the
empty intersection is A1∩B2,s a y ,t h e nw ew r i t eA1
B1ZA2
B2, where the three lines in
the “Z” connect those pairs of split parts that have nonempty intersections. The
deﬁnition of the Z-relation is very similar to that of the compatibility of two splits,however it involves partial splits rather than complete splits.
Assume that we have a collection of partial splits SonX. Consider two partial
splits S
1=A1
B1∈Sand S2=A2
B2∈Sfor which the Z-relationA1
B1ZA2
B2holds. The
Z-operation applied to S1and S2is deﬁned as the creation of two new splits
S/prime
1=A1
B1∪B2and S/prime
2=A1∪A2
B2. (11.2)
It can happen that the two new splits equal the original ones, in which case we saythat the pair of splits {S
1,S2}isunproductive . (Note that a pair of full splits on Xis
always unproductive. ) Otherwise, at least one of the two new splits contains moretaxa than its predecessor, and in this case the pair of splits is called productive .B a s e d
on the Z-operation, the following algorithm computes a set of complete splits ¯S
called a Z-closure :
Algorithm 11.2.1 (Z-closure) LetS={S
1,..., Sm}be a set partial splits on X.
We obtain a set ¯Sof complete splits from Sas follows: While Scontains a productive
pair of splits {Si,Sj}, apply the Z-operation to obtain two new splits {S/prime
i,S/prime
j}and then
replace the former pair by the latter pair in S. Finally, deﬁne ¯Sa st h eu n i o no ft h es e t
of all complete splits in Sand the set of all trivial splits on X.
This algorithm operates “in place” , maintaining the splits in an array of constantsize, in which pairs of splits are replaced by pairs of derived ones. The algorithm runsin polynomial time, because at least one of the splits derived from a productive pairwill contain more taxa than the split that it replaces in S.H o w e v e r ,t h er e s u l to ft h i s
algorithm depends on the order in which splits are processed. In our experience,the order-dependency is usually not very severe, with different runs resulting in adifference of very few splits. In practice, the algorithm is run ten times and thenthe union of all results is taken to be an approximation of the “full” Z-closure.(The latter is deﬁned as the full closure of the Z-closure operation applied to S,
obtained by repeatedly applying the Z-clos ure to all pairs of sequences generated so
far, until no new sequences arise.) The complexity of computing the full Z-closureis currently unknown. We illustrate an application of the Z-closure method inFigure 11.3.
Suppose we are given a collection of partial phylogenetic trees T=(T
1,..., Tk)
onX.L e tS be the set of all partial splits represented by the trees in Tand let ¯Sbe
the Z-closure of Sobtained using the above algorithm. How to deﬁne the set of all

270 Phylogenetic networks from trees
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2
(c) Tree T3 (d) Tree T4
(e) Tree T5 (f) Super network N
Figure 11.3 (a–e) Five partial gene trees T1,..., T5on13–25 plant taxa. (f) The corresponding super
split network Non all 26taxa, computed using the Z-closure method. The edges in Nare
scaled to represent the number of input trees that contain the edge. The network Nshows
that the placement of the pair of taxa Physaria bellii and Physaria gracilis differs in the five
trees.
splits in ¯Sthat occur in a proportion of more than pof the input trees, for a ﬁxed
number p?
T o answer this, we must deﬁne what we mean by the statement that a complete
split “occurs” in a given partial tree. For any complete split S=A
BonXand any
partial tree TonX,w es a yt h a t Tisrelevant forS,i fTcontains taxa from both

271 11.2 Consensus super split networks for unrooted trees
parts of S, that is, if we have X(T)∩A/negationslash=∅ andX(T)∩B/negationslash=∅,w h e r e X(T)⊆X
denotes the set of all taxa that appear as labels in T.I fTis relevant for S,t h e n
we say that So c c u r s inT,i ft h erestriction ofSto the taxon set X(T), in symbols
S|X(T)orS|T, is a split of T, that is, is contained in the split encoding S(T)o fT.
With these concepts in place, for any proportion p, with 0 <p<1, we can
compute
¯Sp(T)=/braceleftbigg
S∈¯S:|{T∈T(S):S|X(T)∈S(T)}|
|T(S)|>p/bracerightbigg
, (11.3)
whereT(S) denotes the set of all trees in Tthat are relevant for the split S.B a s e d
on this, we deﬁne:Deﬁnition 11.2.2 (Consensus supertrees and networks) LetTbe a set of partial
trees on X. The set of strict consensus splits forTis given by
¯S
strict(T)={S∈¯S|T∈T(S)⇒S∈S(T)}, (11.4)
that is, the set of all splits that occur in all trees that are relevant for them. The set ofmajority consensus splits forTis given by
¯S
majority (T)=¯S1
2(T). (11.5)
The split network used to represent ¯Sp(T)for any value of p from 0to1is called a
super split network .
We conjecture that the set of strict consensus splits ¯Sstrict(T)i sa l w a y sc o m p a t i b l e
and thus representable by a phylogenetic tree. If this is true, then this construc-tion provides a supertree method. However, the set of majority consensus splits
¯S
majority (T) is not necessarily compatible, in general. In fact, the latter statement
holds for ¯Sp(T) with any choice of pbetween 0 and 1.
Exercise 11.2.3 (Majority consensus incompatible) Construct an example that
shows that the majority consensus splits for a set of partial trees is not necessarilycompatible.
11.2.1 Inferring split weights
If the partial trees T1,..., TkonXunder consideration have weighted edges, then
the question arises how to use the given edge weights to assign weights to the splitsin the Z-closure of the splits from the trees.
It can be shown that for each split Sin the Z-closure ¯Sthere exists some relevant
input tree T∈Tin which Soccurs [ 126]. Based on this result, there are several
possible ways to assign a weight ω(S) to a split S∈¯S. One possibility would be
to use the minimum weight over all partial splits of the form S|
T,w h e r e Tis any
input tree in which Soccurs. A second possibility would be to use the average of

Diplotaxis erucoides 
Raphanus sativus
Hirschfeldia incanaSinapidendron frutescens
Sinapidendron angustifolium
Diplotaxis siifolia
Sinapis arvense
Sinapis alba
Psychine stylosa
Eruca sativa Conringia planisiliqua
Calepina irregularisPeg
aeophyton scapiflorumAlliaria petiolata
Peltaria turkmenaThlaspi alliaceum 
Thlaspi arvense
Peltaria alliacea Microthlaspi perfoliatumPachyneurum grandiflorum
Noccaea montana
Noccaea caerulescens
Heliophila coronopifolia
Lobularia libyacaAethionema 
elongatum Aethionema gran
diflora Cochlearia megalosperma
Cochlearia danica
Coch learia p yrenaica
Ionopsidium prolongoi
Ionopsidium ab ulense
Ionopsidium acauleFibigia clypeataDegenia velebetica
Alyssum montanum
Parrya nudicaulis
Chorispora tenella Barbarea vulgarisRorippa amphibia
Rorippa palustris
Cardamine penziesiiCardamine rivularis
Cardamine amaraCardamine hirsutaLepidium sativum
Lepidium virginicum
Lepidium campestre Pritzelago alpina
Descurainia incana
Descurainia bourgeana
Descurainia gilba
Descurainia sophiaHedinia tibetica
Syrenia cuspidata
Cheiranthus cheiriSmelowskia calycina
Chrysochamela velutina
Alyssum klimesiiCrucihimalya molllissima
Crucihimalya stricta
Crucihimalya kneuc
keriCrucihimalya w
allichiiCrucihimalya himalya
Halimolobus perplexa
Boechera divaricarpaBoechera lyalli
Boechera parishii
Boechera stricta MULE
Boechera stricta TET
Boechera lignifera Camelina microcarpa
Pseudoarabidopsis toxophila
Capsella rubella
Capsella bursa-pastorisOlimarabidopsis cabulica
Olimarabidopsis korshinskii
Olimarabidopsis pumila
Olimarabidopsis pumila
Arabidopsis lyrata ssp. petraeaArabidopsis lyrata ssp. petraea
Arabidopsis lyrata ssp. lyrataArabidopsis lyrata ssp. lyrataArabidopsis halleri
Arabidopsis arenosatrnF pseudogenestrnL insertionLesquerella densipilata
Lesquerella stonenesis
Nesila paniculata
Turritis glabraArabidopsis thalianaErucastrum gallicum
Rapistrum rugosumCordylocarpus muricatus
Moricandia arvensisCakile maritimaCarrichtera annua
Vella spinosa
Brassica oleraceaBrassica oleracea var. botrytis
Brassica rapaBrassica juncea
Brassica nigra
Fourraea alpina
Caulanthus heterophyllus
Caulanthus amplexicaulis
Sisymbrium orientale
Sisymbrium irio
Sisymbrium brassiciforme
Sisymbrium altissimum
Draba ellipsoideaIsatis tinctoria
Borreava orientalisTauscheria  lasiocarpa
Draba glomerata
Draba involucrata
Draba lasiophylla
Draba oreades
Draba rigida
Draba lanceolata
Draba nemorosa
Draba aizoides
Arabis procurrens
Arabis pumila
Arabis hirsuta
Arabis aculeolata
Arabis blepharophyllaAubrie
ta deltoidea
Arabis alpina AfricaArabis alpina Europe
Matthiola maderensis
Matthiola chorassanica
Matthiola
 incanaTetracme quadr
icornis
Euclidium syriacumBunias orientale Neotorularia humilisLeiospora pamiricaArabis turriata
Alyssum canescensErophila vernaGuilleniaIasiophylla
III
III
IV IVV
Figure 11.4 A super split network on 71plant taxa. It was constructed from five different gene trees that
were computed using the maximum parsimony method and then processed to removeuncertainties [ 154 ]. Reprinted by permission from Oxford University Press: Molecular Biology
and Evolution, 24:63–73 c/circlecopyrt2007.

273 11.3 Distortion-filtered super split networks for unrooted trees
these weights. However, both of these choices assume that the edge weights in thedifferent input trees are all on the same scale, which is not always the case.
A more widely applicable approach is to use the average relative length of edges
in the input set, by setting
ω(S)=1
|T(S)|/summationdisplay
T∈T(S)ωT(S|X(T))
¯ω(T), (11.6)
whereT(S) denotes the set of all input trees in which Soccurs, ωT(S|X(T))i st h e
weight of the split S|X(T)assigned by the tree T,a n d ¯ω(T)i st h ea v e r a g ew e i g h to f
all edges in tree T.
11.2.2 Applications
In [154], the evolutionary history of nonfunctional trnF pseudogenes in ﬂowering
plants is studied and the authors identify multiple independent origins for trnF
pseudogenes in crucifers. The authors present a super split network on ﬁve genetrees on the loci adh, chs,matK, trnL-F, and ITS containing a total of 71 taxa
representing 68 different species (three species were represented by duplicate copiesof the chslocus). The network was computed using the Z-closure method and is
shown in Figure 11.4.
In [243], super split networks are computed for different values of the threshold
p, to help address some of the common phylogenetic problems that arise from
gene tree incongruence. Six individual gene trees on parasitoid wasps from thefamilies Braconidae and Ichneumonidae are inferred using independent Bayesiananalysis of six gene partitions. None of these trees is compatible with the expectedphylogeny, which was inferred by a mixed-model Bayesian analysis of the combinedpartitions [159]. The super split network of the Z-closure of all splits found in thesix gene trees is shown in Figure 11.5a. By considering only those splits that are
contained in more than two of the gene trees, the expected phylogeny is obtained(see Figure 11.5b).
11.3 Distortion-filtered super split networks for unrooted trees
In the previous section, we discussed how to extend the idea of a consensus splitnetwork to partial trees, using the number of relevant trees in which a split occursas a ﬁlter to control which splits make it into the set of consensus splits.
In this section, we brieﬂy describe an alternative approach to ﬁltering the splits
produced by the Z-closure algorithm. The idea is to assign a distortion value to each
split that measures how much every relevant input tree would have to be modiﬁedin order to accommodate the split [132 ]. A threshold on the distortion values is then
used to ﬁlter the splits. This provides a parameter for controlling the complexity

274 Phylogenetic networks from trees
Chelonus
T oxoneuron
Microplitis
CotesiaGlyptapantelesGlyptaSinophorus
Tranosema
Campopletis
HyposoterChelonus
CotesiaMicroplitis
GlyptapantelesTranosemaSinophorus
Campopletis
Hyposoter
GlyptaT oxoneuron
k r o w t e n r e p u s d e r e t l i F ) b ( k r o w t e n r e p u S ) a (
Figure 11.5 (a) The Z-closure super network for the six gene trees for parasitoid wasps, and (b) a filtered
Z-closure super network for the same dataset, based only on splits found in more than twoof the gene trees, both as reported in [ 243 ].
of the resulting super split network that is similar to the maximum dimensionalityparameter d, which was introduced above for consensus split networks.
LetT=(T
1,..., Tk) be a set of partial trees on X. Formally, for any complete
split SonXwe deﬁne the distortion ofS(with respect to T)a s
∂(S)=k/summationdisplay
i=1∂(Ti,S), (11.7)
where ∂(Ti,S) denotes the minimal homoplasy score forSon the input tree Ti.I n
more detail, this score is deﬁned as the smallest number of (SPR or TBR) branch-swapping operations required to transform some reﬁnement of T
iinto a tree that
contains the split S. The distortion of a split can be efﬁciently computed using
dynamic programing.
11.4 Consensus cluster networks for rooted trees
Recall that a cluster network NonXis a rooted phylogenetic network that is used
to represent a given set of clusters ConXin the hardwired sense, see Section 6.4.
Now, suppose we are given a collection of rooted phylogenetic trees T=
(T1,..., Tk)o nX. Consider the set C(T) of all clusters contained in T.W ec a n
use a cluster network Ncomputed for C(T) by the cluster-popping algorithm to
represent the set of trees T. As is shown in Section 6.7, this network contains a
reﬁnement of every tree in T.
In practice, this works well when the number of incompatibilities in C(T)i s
small or, more precisely, when the maximum size of the connected components inthe associated incompatibility graph IG(C(T)) is not too large.
In more complicated cases, one possible approach is to use only those clusters
that occur in a certain percentage of the input trees, thus obtaining a consensus
cluster network that is akin to the concept of a consensus split network, described
in Section 11.1. However, this suffers from the same draw-back as a consensus split

275 11.5 Minimum hybridization networks
network, namely that major differences that are only supported by one tree (or toofew trees) are not represented in the network.
Note that the cluster-popping algorithm, introduced in Section 6.4, takes as
input a set of clusters and so it can also be used to compute a rooted consensus
super cluster network for a given set of rooted phylogenetic trees on overlapping,
not necessarily identical, taxon sets. An example is shown in Figure 8.7.
11.5 Minimum hybridization networks
Suppose we are given two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees T1and T2onX.
In this section, we consider the problem of computing a phylogenetic network N
onXthat represents (“displays” or “contains”) both T1and T2and has a minimum
number of reticulations. One possible application is in the context of hybridization,for example, of plants, where we might be given two gene trees, one based on anuclear gene and the other based on a chloroplast gene, say. The goal is then toattempt to reconcile the two different trees by postulating hybridization eventsat the reticulate nodes of a suitable rooted phylogenetic network. Because this isa main application of this type of approach, we refer to such a network Nas a
hybridization network forT
1and T2.
In the following, we ﬁrst introduce and discuss the concept of an agreement forest ,
which plays an important role in the computation of hybridization networks. As aﬁrst application of agreement forests, we then look at the problem of computingtherooted SPR distance between two rooted phylogenetic trees using maximum
agreement forests. Finally, we discuss how to compute an optimal hybridizationnetwork using a maximum acyclic agreement forest.
11.5.1 Agreement forests
LetTbe a rooted phylogenetic tree on Xand let C⊂Xbe a subset of taxa. Recall
that, by Deﬁnition 3.16.3, we use T(C) to denote the smallest connected subgraph
ofTthat contains all leaves that are labeled by elements of C, while we use T|Cto
denote the restriction ofTtoC, which is the rooted phylogenetic tree on Cthat is
obtained from T(C) by suppressing all suppressible nodes in T(C).
Consider a set of trees F={F1,..., Fh},w h e r ee a c ht r e e Fiis a rooted phylo-
g e n e t i ct r e eo ns o m et a x o ns e t Xi.W ec a l l Faforest on X,i fn ot w ot r e e ss h a r e
any taxa and Xis the union of all the taxa involved. As such forests are usually
constructed from a pair of two input trees, we refer to the members of such a forestascomponents rather than trees or subtrees, to avoid confusion.
Assume that we are given two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees T
1and T2
onX. For technical purposes (namely to identify the component of a forest that
contains the root of a tree), we assume that the root ρof either tree is a pendant

276 Phylogenetic networks from trees
f e d c b aρ
e f d c b aρ
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2
Figure 11.6 Two rooted phylogenetic trees T1and T2onX={a,..., f}. For technical reasons, each tree
has a pendant root node ρ.
f e c b d aρ
f e d c b aρ
e f d c b aρ
(a) Agreement forest (b) Components in T1 (c) Components in T2
Figure 11.7 (a) An agreement forest F(T1,T2)for the two rooted phylogenetic trees T1and T2in
Figure 11.6. In (b) and (c) we indicate (in bold) how the components of F(T1,T2)appear
as subtrees of T1and T2, respectively.
edge that has been adjoined to the original root. Moreover, we sometimes implicitlytreatρas an additional taxon label and then implicitly consider the two trees as
phylogenetic trees on X∪{ρ}.T h i si si l l u s t r a t e di nF i g u r e 11.6.A na g r e e m e n t
forest for two trees is deﬁned as follows [107 ]:
Deﬁnition 11.5.1 (Agreement forest) Anagreement forest for two rooted phyloge-
netic trees T
1and T 2onX∪{ρ}is a forest F ={Fρ,F1,..., Fh−1}onX∪{ρ}such
that
(i)Each component F iis a restricted subtree of T 1and of T 2.
(ii)The root ρis contained in F ρ.
(iii) The trees in {T1(Xi)|i=ρ,1..., h−1}and{T2(Xi)|i=ρ,1,..., h−1}
are node disjoint subtrees of T 1and T 2, respectively.
In Figure 11.7, we show an agreement forest for the two rooted phylogenetic
trees T1and T2in Figure 11.6. Any such agreement forest describes one way of
simultaneously partitioning the two input trees into a collection of componentsthat occur in both trees.

277 11.5 Minimum hybridization networks
f e d c b aρ
f e d b c aρ
f e d c b aρ
e f d c b aρ
(a) Tree T1 (b) One rSPR                    (c) Two rSPRs                  (d) Three rSPRs
Figure 11.8 How to transform the rooted phylogenetic tree T1into T2using a set of rSPR moves based
on an agreement forest F(T1,T2). In each illustration, the component of F(T1,T2)to be
moved is show in bold and the intended rSPR move is indicated by an arrow. (a) The initialtree T
1. (b) Result of the first rSPR move, involving taxon b. (c) Result of the second rSPR
move, involving taxon c. (d) Result of the the third rSPR move, involving the taxa {a,b,c,d}.
This is the target tree T2.
11.5.2 Maximum agreement forests and the rSPR distance
In Section 3.8we introduced branch-swapping methods on unrooted phylogenetic
trees. Recall that in a subtree prune and regraft (SPR) move, a subtree is detached(“pruned”) from a given phylogenetic tree Tand then reattached (“re-grafted”) at
a different location of the tree T. In the following, we discuss the rooted version of
this operation, called a rooted SPR (rSPR) , that is performed by detaching a rooted
subtree of Tand then reattaching it somewhere else in the tree.
Assume that we are given two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees T
1and T2
onXand let F(T1,T2)={Fρ,F1,..., Fh−1}be an agreement forest for T1and
T2.I nb o t ht r e e s ,t h er o o to fa n yo ft h ec o m p o n e n t s F1,..., Fh−1is attached to
the rest of the tree by a single edge. T o transform one tree into the other, what isrequired is that we detach each such edge and then reattach it at the appropriatelocation. As the latter operation is a rSPR move, this provides an (oversimpliﬁed)argument for the following result [ 25,107]:
Lemma11.5.2 (Agreement forest and rSPR) Let T
1and T 2be two rooted, bifurcating
phylogenetic trees on X. One tree can be transformed into the other by a sequence of
h−1different rSPR moves if and only if there exists an agreement forest F(T1,T2)
for the two trees that contains at most h components.T o illustrate this result, consider the two rooted phylogenetic trees T
1and T2
displayed in Figure 11.6. One possible agreement forest F(T1,T2) for these two
t r e e si sg i v e ni nF i g u r e 11.7. This forest contains four components and so the lemma
implies that one can transform T1into T2using three rSPR moves, as demonstrated
in Figure 11.8.
LetT1and T2be two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X.T h erSPR
distance ,d e n o t e db y drSPR(T1,T2), is deﬁned as the minimum number of rSPR

278 Phylogenetic networks from trees
moves required to transform one tree into the other. By the above lemma, thecomputation of the rSPR distance is equivalent to computing an agreement forestforT
1and T2that contains a minimum number of components. Because such a
forest “maximizes the amount of agreement” detected between two trees, we havethe following deﬁnition:Deﬁnition 11.5.3 (Maximum agreement forest) Let T
1and T 2be two rooted,
bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X.Amaximum agreement forest F(T1,T2)for T 1
and T 2is an agreement forest for the two trees that contains a minimum number of
components.Note that Lemma 11.5.2 implies that d
rSPR(T1,T2)=|F(T1,T2)|−1 holds.
The problem of computing the rSPR distance between two rooted phylogenetic
trees on Xis known to be NP-hard, but ﬁxed-parameter tractable (FPT) [25].
In this context, the FPT property means that the problem can be solved by analgorithm whose runtime depends polynomially on the size of the problem andexponentially on the value of the answer. In the following, we discuss the two mainapproaches to simplifying the problem of ﬁnding a maximum agreement forest,which are also used to obtain the FPT result. These also play a central role in thecomputation of a minimum hybridization network.
The ﬁrst approach is based on the following observation: If two rooted phylo-
genetic trees T
1and T2share a maximal common subtree T/primethen that subtree is a
component of every maximum agreement forest F(T1,T2). So, in a preprocessing
step, one can replace any such subtree T/primeby a new leaf that is labeled by a new
formal taxon xT/prime, which represents the subtree T/prime(and all taxa that label it). Clearly,
this subtree reduction step decreases the size of input without changing the rSPR
distance.
The second reduction method is based on the concept of a “caterpillar chain” .
LetTbe a rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic tree on X. Consider a set of leaves
q1,..., qttogether with their parents p1,..., pt,s u c ht h a t pi+1is the parent of pi
fori=2,..., t,a n de i t h e r p2is the parent of p1orp2=p1.T h es u b t r e e Cwith
path ( pt,..., p1)a n dl e a v e s( qt,..., q1)i sc a l l e da caterpillar chain inT.
For example, consider the two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees T1and T2
displayed in Figure 11.9a and b. The nodes labeled a,b,..., fform the leaf-set of
a caterpillar chain in both trees.
Assume that two rooted phylogenetic trees T1and T2onXcontain the same
caterpillar chain C.T h echain reduction applied to such a shared caterpillar chain
Cis deﬁned as the operation that replaces the caterpillar chain Cby a reduced
caterpillar chain C/primethat has only three parent nodes ( p1,p2,p3)a n dt h r e en e w
leaves labeled by three formal taxa ( x1,x2,x3), in both trees.

279 11.5 Minimum hybridization networks
tsfedcbarT’
tsabcdefrT’
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2
xxxxr T’ 2 13x x x x r T’ 2 31
(c) Reduction of T1 (d) Reduction of T2
Figure 11.9 In (a) and (b) we show two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees T3and T4. The nodes
labeled a,..., fform the leaf-set of a maximal caterpillar chain that is contained in both
trees, highlighted in bold. In (c) and (d) we show the result of applying a chain reductionand a subtree reduction (involving the leaves labeled sand t) to both trees.
A maximal caterpillar chain Cthat occurs in both trees must necessarily be a
component of every maximum agreement forest F(T1,T2)[25]. Hence, in a pre-
processing step we can reduce all such chains using the chain reduction operation,decreasing the size of input and leaving the rSPR distance unchanged.
In Figure 11.9c and d we see the result of reducing the two rooted phylogenetic
trees T
1and T2. Now, to determine the minimum rSPR distance between the two
networks, we use an exhaustive search to ﬁnd a maximum agreement forest for thetwo reduced trees.
The two described reduction rules can be used to show that the computation of
the rSPR distance is ﬁxed-parameter tractable. First, note that it is easy to tell whereto apply which operation, there is no order-dependency and application takes onlypolynomial time. Once the reductions have all been applied then the two resultingtrees cannot be much larger than the number of rSPR moves required to transformone tree into the other. In more detail, one can show that the number of taxa afterapplication of all possible reductions is at most 28 times the number of requiredrSPR operations [ 25].
11.5.3 Acyclic agreement forests and hybridization networks
Now we come to the main aim of this section, which is to solve the followingproblem:

280 Phylogenetic networks from trees
f e d c b aρ
e f d c b aρρ
af d c be
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2 (c) Network N
Figure 11.10 (a and b) Two rooted phylogenetic trees T1and T2onX={a,..., f}where all components
in the agreement forest F(T1,T2)are indicated in bold. In (c) a rooted phylogenetic network
Nthat represents the two trees T1and T2is shown. This network was obtained by attaching
all components in the agreement forest F(T1,T2)exactly as they are attached to each other
in both trees T1and T2. The components of F(T1,T2)are highlighted in bold.
Problem 11.5.4 (Minimum hybridization network) Let T 1and T 2be two rooted,
bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X. Determine a rooted, bicombining and bifurcating
phylogenetic network N that represents both T 1and T 2and has a minimum number
of reticulations h (T1,T2).
The minimum hybridization network problem is NP-hard, but ﬁxed-parametertractable [ 26].
LetT
1and T2be two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X.A sw eh a v e
seen, any agreement forest F(T1,T2) represents a partitioning of both trees into
components that occur in both trees simultaneously. So far, we have discussed howto useF(T
1,T2) to determine a sequence of rSPR moves that can transform one
of the two trees into the other. Now we want to use F(T1,T2) to compute a rooted
phylogenetic network Nthat represents both trees.
Figure 11.10aa n dbs h o w st w or o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e s T1and T2and how an
agreement forest F(T1,T2) appears in the two rooted phylogenetic trees. The root
node of each component (except for ρ) is attached to two different locations, one
in tree T1and the other in tree T2.
Now, the basic idea is to construct a rooted phylogenetic network Nby simply
joining all components of F(T1,T2) in the way that they are attached in T1and
also as they are attached in T2(we discuss how to join the components later in this
section). The result is illustrated in Figure 11.10c.
However, this simple approach needs to be modiﬁed, because otherwise a prob-
lem can occur, as demonstrated in Figure 11.11. In this example, there is a circular
dependency between the two components of the agreement forest F(T1,T2) asso-
ciated with the label sets {b,e}and{c,d}, displayed in the two phylogenetic trees
T1and T2. While one component attaches to an edge of the other component in
tree T1,i nt r e e T2the two components attach to each other in the opposite order.

281 11.5 Minimum hybridization networks
abcde fρ
acbedfρ
abe cdfρ
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2 (d) Invalid network N
Figure 11.11 In (a) and (b) we show two rooted phylogenetic trees T1and T2onX. In both trees, the
components of a maximum agreement forest F(T1,T2)are highlighted in bold. Connecting
all components as prescribed by both trees produces the network Nshown in (c). Note
that this network contains a directed cycle and is therefore not a valid rooted phylogeneticnetwork.
In consequence, the resulting network Ncontains a directed cycle and is therefore
not a valid rooted phylogenetic network.
So, for the purpose of computing a minimum hybridization network Nfor
two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees T1and T2onX, we must restrict our
attention to such agreement forests that do not exhibit any circular dependenciesbetween components:Deﬁnition 11.5.5 (Acyclic agreement forest) Let T
1and T 2be two rooted, bifurcat-
ing phylogenetic trees on X. An agreement forest Fa(T1,T2)for T 1and T 2is called
acyclic, if the components of Fa(T1,T2)can be numbered in such a way that if the
root of one component F is an ancestor of the root of some other component F/prime, then
the number assigned to F is lower than the number assigned to F/prime, for all pairs of
components F and F/primeinFa(T1,T2).
Exercise 11.5.6 (Maximum acyclic agreement forest) Determine an acyclic agree-
ment forest for the two trees T 1and T 2displayed in Figure 11.11 that is of minimum
size.Such an acyclic agreement forest for two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees T
1
and T2is called a maximum acyclic agreement forest , if it contains a minimum
number of components. Based on this, we have the following result [ 15]:
Theorem 11.5.7 (Agreement forests and hybridization networks) Let T 1and T 2
be two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X. Any acyclic agreement forest
Fa(T1,T2)with h components corresponds to a rooted phylogenetic network N on X
that represents both T 1and T 2, is bicombining and bifurcating, and contains at most
h−1reticulations.

282 Phylogenetic networks from trees
ot dcba srqp eρ
AB
oedcbatsrq pρ
BA
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2
Figure 11.12 The two rooted phylogenetic trees T1and T2shown in (a) and (b) each contain the same
two maximal caterpillar chains labeled Aand B. Because Alies below Bin tree T1and
above Bin tree T2, these two chains cannot occur together in an acyclic agreement forest
forT1and T2.
Based on this result, the minimum hybridization network problem can be solvedby determining a maximum acyclic agreement forest and then extending it to anetwork. We address both problems in the following.
The problem of ﬁnding an acyclic agreement forest F
a(T1,T2)i sN P - h a r d ,b u t
ﬁxed-parameter tractable [ 26]. As in the case of computing the rSPR distance, a
set of reductions is ﬁrst applied to the two input trees T1and T2so as to reduce the
size of the problem and then an exhaustive search is performed to ﬁnd a maximumagreement forest for the two reduced trees.
One possibility is the subtree reduction presented in the previous section,
which can be used without modiﬁcation in the context of acyclic agreementforests. In this case we reduce a subtree T
/primeand we obtain two trees T/prime
1and T/prime
2
that both contain a leaf labeled by a formal taxa xT/prime. In this case we have that
h(T1,T2)=h(T/prime
1,T/prime
2). One can compute Fa(T1,T2)f r o m Fa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2) by expand-
ingxT/primeback. Because we are now concentrating on acyclic agreement forests, we
c a ni n t r o d u c ean e wr e d u c t i o nm e t h o dc a l l e dt h e cluster reduction .L e t T1and
T2be two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X. If there exists a cluster C
onXthat is represented by both trees, then we can use a divide-and-conquer
approach, and decompose the problem into the two problems of ﬁnding a max-imum acyclic forest for the pairs ( T
1|C,T2|C)a n d( T1|(X−C),T2|(X−C)). In this
case we have h(T1,T2)=h(T1|C,T2|C)+h(T1|(X−C),T2|(X−C))a n dFa(T1,T2)=
Fa(T1|C,T2|C)∪Fa(T1|(X−C),T2|(X−C))[166].
Note that both of these reductions involve whole subtrees of the two input trees
and so they do not affect the acylicity of the agreement forests associated withthe trees. This is not the case for the chain reduction as deﬁned in Section 11.5.2,
because a caterpillar chain can lie above nodes that do not belong to the chain.This is illustrated in Figure 11.12, where one caterpillar chain Alies below a second
caterpillar chain Bin the rooted phylogenetic tree T
1,a n da b o v ei ti nt h er o o t e d

283 11.5 Minimum hybridization networks
phylogenetic tree T2. In consequence, the two components Aand Bcan never
occur together in an acyclic agreement forest for the two trees T1and T2.T h i s
shows that a maximal caterpillar chain Cthat occurs in both trees is not necessarily
a component of every maximum acyclic agreement forest.
T o accommodate this issue, we must ﬁrst modify the deﬁnition of the chain
reduction slightly. Let Cbe a maximal caterpillar chain deﬁned by a set of leaves
q1,..., qtofTwith parents p1,..., ptthat is present in both trees. A chain
reduction replaces such a chain Cby a reduced caterpillar chain C/primethat has path
nodes pt,p1and leaf nodes labeled by two formal taxa ( x1,x2) together with a
new edge ( pt,p1). We keep track of the new caterpillar chains of length 2, called
2-chains for short.
When replacing a caterpillar chain Cby a single edge e=(v,w )i nt h er e d u c e d
trees T/prime
1and T/prime
2, we assign weight m(e)=/lscript(C)−2t ot h ee d g ee ,w h e r e/lscript( C)
denotes the number of leaves in C. In the presence of overlapping chains or
reduced clusters, additional adjustments to this count have to be made by addinga l lt h ew e i g h t sa l r e a d ya s s i g n e dt oe d g e si nt h ec a t e r p i l l a r .
T o ﬁnd an optimal forest F
a(T/prime
1,T/prime
2), we restrict our attention to “legitimate”
acyclic agreement forests. An acyclic agreement forest Fa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)i sc a l l e dlegitimate
if and only if, for each new 2-chain {x1,x2}created by a chain reduction, one of
the following conditions holds:
(i) There exists a component FiinFa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)s u c ht h a t{ x1,x2}⊆ L(Fi) hold, or
(ii) there exist two components Fiand FjinFa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)s u c ht h a t {x1}= L(Fi)
and{x2}= L(Fj) hold.
Then, when searching for a maximum acyclic agreement forest for the two reducedtrees T
/prime
1and T/prime
2, we aim at minimizing the following score among all possible
legitimate acyclic agreement forests:
H(Fa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2))=(|F a(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)|− 1)+/summationdisplay
m(e), (11.8)
where the sum is taken over all edges ethat have a positive weight m(e)a n da r e
not present in the agreement forest. These edges correspond to those caterpillarchains contained in the original input trees T
1and T2that do not occur as chains
inFa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2).
See [ 26] for justiﬁcation for this formula, where it is shown that for any caterpillar
chain Cpresent in the two input trees there are only two possibilities: Either the
chain Cis contained in the ﬁnal network N,o re v e r yl e a f vinCoccurs as a
reticulate node in N. In other words, every caterpillar chain Cthat occurs in the
input, but does not make it into the output (because of the acyclicity condition),gives rise to m(e) additional reticulations (see Figure 11.13c–d).

284 Phylogenetic networks from trees
x x x xoρ
1 234 x2 x1 x4 x3 oρ
x4 x3 x1 x2 oρ
(a) Reduction T'' '1(b) Reduction T2(c) Network N
ot bcde srqp aρ
(d) Minimum hybridization network N
Figure 11.13 In (a) and (b) we show the two rooted phylogenetic trees T/prime
1and T/prime
2obtained from the trees
T1and T2in Figure 11.12 by two chain reductions. A maximum acyclic agreement forest
Fa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)containing four components is highlighted in bold. (c) A rooted phylogenetic
network N/primeobtained from T/prime
1and T/prime
2usingFa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2). (d) A minimum hybridization network
NforT1and T2obtained by “undoing” the chain reductions in N/prime.
LetFal(T/prime
1,T/prime
2) denote a minimum-weight legitimate acyclic agreement for-
est. Then we have that H(Fal(T/prime
1,T/prime
2))=h(T1,T2) and we can obtain Fa(T1,T2)
fromFal(T/prime
1,T/prime
2) in the following way. For each 2-chain {x1,x2}created by chain
reduction, do the following:
(i) if there exists a component FiinFal(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)s u c ht h a t{ x1,x2}⊆ L(Fi), then
undo the reduction of {x1,x2}inFi,o r ,
(ii) if there exist two components Fiand FjinFal(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)s u c ht h a t {x1}= L(Fi)
and{x2}= L(Fj), then Fa(T1,T2)=Fal(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)−Fi−Fj∪{a1,..., an},
where {a1,..., an}are the taxa of the caterpillar chain that was reduced into
{x1,x2}.
Given an acyclic agreement forest for T1and T2, we can compute a minimum
hybridization network for T1and T2using the following algorithm:
Algorithm 11.5.8 (Minimum hybridization network) LetFa(T1,T2)be an acyclic
agreement forest for T 1and T 2. An associated hybridization network N is computed
in the following steps:
(i)Find an acyclic ordering, F ρ,F1,F2,...,F kofFa(T1,T2).
(ii)Set N 0=Fρ.
(iii) For i=1to k compute a hybridization network N ias follows:

285 11.6 Minimum hybridization networks and galled trees
Connect F ito N i−1using two new edges that each join the root of F ito
some (not necessarily distinct) edge of N i−1so that the resulting hybridization
network N idisplays T 1|L(F1,...,Fi)and T 2|L(F1,...,Fi).
(iv) The result is given by N =Nk.
LetT1and T2be two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X. Assume that
we are given an acyclic agreement forest Fa(T/prime
1,T/prime
2) for two reductions T/prime
1and T/prime
2
of the two input trees, possibly with weighted edges that indicate the presence ofreduced caterpillar chains. T o construct a hybridization network for T
1and T2,a s
indicated in Figure 11.13d we undo all reductions in the opposite order that they
where originally done in. We obtain an acyclic agreement forest Fa(T1,T2)a n d
then we construct the corresponding network by Algorithm 11.5.8.
11.5.4 Application
In Figure 11.14,w ed i s p l a yt w ot r e e s T1and T2computed for 14 difference grass
species (Poaceae ), based on the phyB and waxy gene, respectively, see [ 87]. Each
of the two accompanying rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2contain both
trees and have a minimum number of reticulate nodes with this property, namelythree. If we assume that differences in topology of the two trees T
1and T2are due
to hybridization events, then, for example, the network N1suggests that glyceria
is a hybrid of the lineages leading to melica and triticium. In the case of the two
other putative hybrid species, lygeum and chusquea , their evolution requires the
postulation of additional lineages to resolve the fact that they appear to be hybridsof recent and less recent lineages. We emphasize that neither network proves that
hybridization is the cause of the incongruence between the trees T
1and T2and
additional biological evidence is required to support suspected cases of speciationby hybridization.
11.6 Minimum hybridization networks and galled trees
LetT1andT2be two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X.I ft h e i rr o o t e dS P R
distance drSPR(T1,T2) is one, then all their maximum agreement forests are acylic
and their hybridization number h(T1,T2)i sa l s oo n e .I nt h i sc a s ea n ym i n i m u m
hybridization network for T1and T2has the galled tree property.
In [185], this approach is extended to the case of two rooted, not necessarily
bifurcating phylogenetic trees T1and T2onXas follows: Determine whether there
exist two rooted, bifurcating phylogenetic trees T/prime
1and T/prime
2that reﬁne T1and T2,
respectively, and for which drSPR(T/prime
1,T/prime
2)=1 holds. If such trees exist, then a galled
tree representing T/prime
1and T/prime
2is computed. Even this extended approach is very

286 Phylogenetic networks from trees
(a) Tree T1forphyB (b) Tree T2forwaxy
(c) Network N1 (d) Network N2
Figure 11.14 Two rooted phylogenetic trees (a) T1and (b) T2, on 14 grasses, based on the phyB gene
and waxy gene [87 ]. The two rooted phylogenetic networks N1and N2shown in (c) and
(d) both contain each of the two trees T1and T2, each using only three reticulate nodes. Each
network displays a set of of putative hybridization events that may explain the differencesbetween two trees.
limited, as it can only solve the case in which two trees can be represented by agalled tree that has only a single gall.
An alternative and more general approach operates as follows [ 127]. Let T
1
and T2be two rooted, not necessarily bifurcating phylogenetic trees on X,a n d
letC=C(T1)∪C(T2) be the set of clusters contained in the two trees. T o obtain
ag a l l e dt r e e Nthat represents both T1and T2, if one exists, compute a galled
tree Nthat represents C, as described in Section 8.3, if one exists, by virtue of
Lemma 6.11.4.
When using a method that accepts multifurcating trees as input, one can ﬁrst
contract such edges in the input trees that have low bootstrap values (Section 3.10)
or posterior probabilities (Section 3.11) so as to avoid the computation of superﬂu-
ous reticulations that would only serve to represent uncertainties in the input trees.

287 11.7 Networks from multi-labeled trees
abcdabcde ba cde e d c b a
(a) Multi-labeled tree T (b) Cluster network N1 (c) Exact network N2
Figure 11.15 (a) A multi-labeled tree TonX. (b) A rooted phylogenetic network N1representing
all clusters contained in T. (c) A rooted phylogenetic network N2that provides an exact
representation of T.
In contrast, when using a method that requires the input trees to be bifurcating,such as the one described in the previous section, then the resulting networks canbe overly complicated because they must accommodate all topological differencesamong the trees, whether biologically relevant or not.
11.7 Networks from multi-labeled trees
Gene duplication is a common event in evolution and so many genes are present inmultiple copies in a genome. In most phylogenetic studies based on gene sequences,a single instance of the gene is used per taxon. When some taxa are each representedby more than one copy of a gene, then the resulting phylogenetic tree is called multi-
labeled . If the duplication history of a gene is itself of interest, then it may be helpful
to map such a multi-labeled phylogenetic tree onto a rooted phylogenetic networkso as to see which parts of the tree are similar and where are there differences [ 117].
We start with a formal deﬁnition of a multi-labeled tree:Deﬁnition 11.7.1 (Multi-labeled phylogenetic tree) Amulti-labeled phylogenetic
tree T on Xconsists of a tree T =(V,E), in which all nodes have degree /negationslash=2(except
a possible root node), together with a taxon multi-labeling λthat maps each taxon x
to a set λ(x)of one or more leaves such that every leaf obtains precisely one label.
In the following, all multi-labeled phylogenetic trees considered are rooted. Let T
be a multi-labeled tree on X. Our goal is to compute a rooted phylogenetic network
NonXthat “represents” Tand is single-labeled. There are two different efﬁcient
approaches to this problem, one is based on clusters and the other uses nestedlabels, see Figure 11.15.
In the cluster-based approach [ 22], the aim is to represent all clusters present
in the multi-labeled tree T.E a c he d g e ein a multi-labeled tree Tdeﬁnes a cluster
C(e) that is given by the set of taxa that label all leaves below e. The set of clusters
C(T) obtained in this way contains at most one cluster for every edge, as different

288 Phylogenetic networks from trees
edges may give rise to the same cluster (using different instances of the same taxa).Then a cluster network Nis computed for C(T) to represent T. Here is a summary
of the algorithm:Algorithm 11.7.2 (Cluster-based network) For a given multi-labeled phylogenetic
tree T on X, we compute a rooted phylogenetic network N on Xthat represents all
clusters in T as follows: First, determine the set of clusters C(T)represented by T.
Then compute N as a cluster network for C(T)using the cluster-popping algorithm.
In the nested-labels approach [ 117], the main idea is to determine and reuse large
congruent subtrees of the multi-labeled tree T. First, in a bottom-up traversal of
T, we assign a nested label ν(v)t oe v e r yn o d ev , as described in Section 6.14.4:
(i) The nested label of a leaf is its taxon label.
(ii) The nested label of an internal node is deﬁned as the multi-set of all nested
labels of its children.
We then order all nodes by their nested labels, ﬁrst by decreasing size and secondlexicographically, in what we call an elimination order O.I ns u c ha no r d e r O,
all nodes that have the same nested-label are adjacent to each other. Moreover,any node vcomes before all of its descendants. In the second step the aim is to
transform Tinto a rooted phylogenetic network N.T od os o ,w ei n s p e c ta l ln o d e s
ofTin the order O. Whenever we ﬁnd two adjacent nodes vandwthat have the
same nested label ν(v)=ν(w), then we add a new reticulate edge from the parent
node of wtov, remove the whole subtree rooted at wfrom Tand remove all its
nodes from O. Here is a summary of the algorithm:
Algorithm 11.7.3 (Nested-labels-based network) For a given multi-labeled phylo-
genetic tree T on X, we compute a rooted phylogenetic network N on Xthat represents
T as follows. First, determine the nested labels of all nodes in T, and then use them to
obtain an elimination ordering O of the nodes of T. Second, inspect each node vof
T in order O. If the successor wofvin O has the same nested label as v, then join
the parent of wtovb yan e wr e t i c u l a t ee d g ea n dt h e nr e m o v et h es u b t r e er o o t e da t w
from T and all its nodes from O.Optionally, at the end of the algorithm, one can insert additional edges to ensurethat the resulting network satisﬁes the reticulation-separation property (seeDeﬁnition 6.4.1).
By construction, the nested label of the root of the resulting phylogenetic network
Nequals the nested label of the root of the original multi-labeled tree T.M o r e o v e r ,
as the nested label of Tis essentially the Newick representation of T, as discussed
in Section 4.5, the multi-labeled tree Tcan be reconstructed from Nand so
the network provides a loss-less representation of the multi-labeled phylogenetic

289 11.8 DLT reconciliation of gene and species trees
tree T. For this reason, we call the rooted phylogenetic network Ncomputed by
Algorithm 11.7.3 anexact representation of T.
In practice, the cluster-based approach usually produces simpler networks than
the nested-labeled approach. Hence, when the represented clusters are of moreinterest than the actual tree itself, the former approach is more suitable. The latterapproach is to be preferred when the whole topology of the multi-labeled tree is ofinterest and an exact representation is desired.
11.7.1 Application
An analysis of the history of complex genome merging events within a set of high-polyploid species in the plant genus Cerastium (Caryophyllaceae) is presented in
[34]. The authors of the paper apply the nested-label approach to a multi-labeled
phylogenetic tree. This is the majority tree over a set of maximum parsimonytrees that were computed for a noncoding region from the second largest subunitof the RNA polymerase gene family (RPB2). The authors present the resultingrooted phylogenetic network and argue that it shows how hybridization and poly-ploidization have acted as key evolutionary processes in creating a plant groupwhere allopolyploids of high ploidy levels outnumber extant parental genomes(see Figure 11.16).
11.8 DLT reconciliation of gene and species trees
A fundamental observation in phylogeny is that different genes give rise to differenttrees. In more detail, suppose we are interested in the evolutionary history ofa set of taxa X.I fw ec o m p u t et w op h y l o g e n e t i ct r e e s T
1and T2onXbased
on the sequences of two distinct genes g1and g2, then in most cases the two
trees will exhibit differences in their topologies. Although some of the differencesmay be explained by inaccuracies in the tree-inference process, others may bethe consequence of evolutionary events such as gene duplications ,gene losses or
horizontal gene transfers . We refer to all these three types of events as DLT events.
Now let us assume that we know the species phylogeny T
sponX,t h a ti s ,t h et r u e
evolutionary history of the set of taxa X.T h e n ,a n y gene phylogeny T onXwill
usually differ from the species tree Tsp, even if it has been correctly inferred, see
Figure 11.17. T o explicitly accommodate gene duplication events, throughout this
section all gene trees considered are multi-labeled trees, as deﬁned in the previoussection. Moreover, for computational reasons, we assume that all gene trees arebifurcating.
Under the assumption that the discrepancies between a species tree T
spand a
gene tree TonXare due to gene duplication, loss and transfer events, we can
formulate the following computational problem:

290 Phylogenetic networks from trees
100
100
100
100
87
6470
73
93
100100
8770100
321
9162
99
80
9992
97
54
C. eriophorum 4XC. arv. ssp. str. 4XC. beer. ECAN
C. alpinum AUS 8X
C. alpinum NOR 8X
C. alpinum CAN 8X
C. alpinum GRE 8XC. arcticum SVA    12X
C. arcticum CAN    12XC. cerastoides CAN
C. cerastoldes NOR
C. dubiumC. lithospermifoliumC. uniflorum 
PSE
C. eriophorum PSE
C. latifolium      4XC. uniflorum      4X
C. semidecandrum     4X
C. regelii           8X
C. jenisejense  8XC. nigrescens 
SHE  12X
C. nigrescens NOR  12X
C. beer.  WCAN   8XStellaria media
C. pusillum
C. velutinum
C. fischerianum
C. arvense
C. runemarkii 4X
C. biebersteinii 4X8696
64
8X8X8X8X8X
Figure 11.16 Rooted phylogenetic network representing a possible duplication history for a set of high-
polyploid species in the plant genus Cerastium (Caryophyllaceae), computed from a multi-
labeled tree for the RPB2 gene, as reported in [ 34]. Geographical origin is indicated by
prefixes: AUS = Austria, ECAN = East Canada, GRE = Greenland, NOR = Norway, SHE =Shetland, SVA = Svalbard and WCAN = West Canada. Two pseudo genes are labeled PSE.Numbers above the edges of the network are bootstrap values for the multi-labeled tree.Reprinted by permission from Oxford University Press: Systematic Biology, 56(3):467–476
c/circlecopyrt2007.
ac bac bg
x*
x x
ac b
(a) Species tree (b) Gene evolution (c) Gene tree T
Figure 11.17 (a) A species tree TsponX={a,b,c}. (b) An evolutionary scenario in which a gene g
experiences a duplication event, labeled ∗, and then three subsequent losses, each marked
x. (c) The resulting gene tree T.

291 11.8 DLT reconciliation of gene and species trees
e d c b a eddcbao
e d c b axxx
x xx***
(a) Species tree Tsp (b) Gene tree T (c) A possible reconciliation
Figure 11.18 (a) A species tree TsponX={a,..., e}. (b) A gene tree TonX. (c) A possible reconciliation
of the two trees that uses three duplications (marked ∗) and six losses (dashed lines leading
to an x).
Problem 11.8.1 (Gene tree–species tree reconciliation) Given a species tree T spand
a (multi-labeled) gene tree T on Xthat differ topologically, explain the differences by
postulating a suitable “optimal” series of gene duplication, loss and transfer events.We ﬁrst discuss the easier problem of reconciling a gene tree and a species treeusing only duplication and loss events. Then we tackle the more difﬁcult problemof reconciliation using all three types of DLT events.
11.8.1 Duplication and loss
LetTbe a (bifurcating, multi-labeled) gene tree and Tspa species tree, on X.O u r
aim is to explain or to reconcile the differences between Tand Tspby postulating
aduplication-loss scenario consisting of a number of appropriate gene duplication
events and gene loss events in T.
In a duplication–loss scenario, each internal node in the gene tree Trepresents
either a speciation event or a duplication event that the gene has experienced duringthe evolution of the associated species. Each gene-tree node vthat represents a spe-
ciation event corresponds to a species-tree node wthat represents the same event,
whereas every gene tree node vthat represents a duplication event is associated with
a species-tree edge ealong which the duplication event took place. (T echnically,
we map vto a species-tree node in both cases and, in the latter case, the edge eis
identiﬁed via its target node.) Moreover, the gene tree Tc a nb ed e p i c t e da se v o l v i n g
completely inside the species tree T
sp, as illustrated in Figure 11.18.
Deﬁnition 11.8.2 (Duplication–loss scenario) L e tTb eag e n et r e ea n dT spas p e c i e s
tree onX.Aduplication–loss scenario for T and T spis given by an assignment γthat
m a p st h es e to fn o d e so ft h eg e n et r e eTt ot h es e to fn o d e so ft h es p e c i e st r e eT sp,a n d
has the following properties:

292 Phylogenetic networks from trees
(i)Ifvis a leaf of T with taxon label x, then γ(v)is a leaf of T spand has the same
taxon label x.
(ii)For every edge e =(v,w )of the gene tree T we have that γ(v)is an ancestor of
γ(w)in the species tree.
This deﬁnition does not completely determine a reconciliation between a gene
tree Tand a species tree Tspbecause it does not explicitly say which gene-tree nodes
correspond to speciation events and which ones correspond to duplications. So, inprinciple, many different reconciliations are possible for a single duplication–lossscenario.
T o disambiguate this, any internal gene-tree node uis interpreted as a speciation
node, if its two children vandware mapped to incomparable species-tree nodes,
and as a duplication node , otherwise. In the latter case the duplication is assumed
to take place along the species-tree edge that leads to γ(u). We use V
sand Vdto
denote the set of speciation nodes and duplication nodes in T, respectively.
Note that associating a gene-tree node uwith a speciation event only makes sense
if its two children vandware mapped to incomparable species-tree nodes. On
the other hand, interpreting such a node uas a duplication node is unnecessarily
costly, as a duplication event in the gene tree that is located immediately before aspeciation event in the species tree implies two losses.
While the speciation and duplication events are explicitly deﬁned in terms of
nodes in the gene tree, the losses associated with a duplication–loss scenario areonly implicitly given. A loss arises whenever a gene-tree edge econtinues through
a species-tree node w, thus indicating that the gene did not participate in the
speciation event at w, thereby losing a lineage, see Figure 11.18c.
Clearly, the duplication–loss scenario depicted in Figure 11.18c is not optimal
in the sense that it contains many more duplications and losses than are necessaryto reconcile the depicted species tree and gene tree. There is a straight-forwardalgorithm for computing a duplication–loss scenario that minimizes the numberof duplication and losses required by a duplication scenario, based on the idea ofmapping each gene-tree node vonto the lowest common ancestor of the images of
the leaves below v[238]:
Algorithm 11.8.3 (Optimal duplication–loss scenario) For a given gene tree T and
species tree T
sponX, an optimal duplication–loss scenario γcan be computed as
follows:
(i)For each leaf vof T set γ(v)=w,w h e r e wi st h el e a fo fT spthat is labeled by the
same taxon as v.
(ii)For each internal node vof T set γ(v)equal to the lowest common ancestor of all
species-tree nodes γ(u), where u is a leaf in T that is a descendant of v.

293 11.8 DLT reconciliation of gene and species trees
e d c b ax*
Figure 11.19 An optimal duplication–loss reconciliation for the gene tree Tand species tree Tspfrom
Figure 11.18, involving one duplication (marked ∗) and one loss (marked x).
e d d c b a b a e d c b a
(a) Species tree Tsp (b) Gene tree T
Figure 11.20 (a) A species tree TsponX={a,..., e}. (b) A gene tree TonX. For each internal gene-tree
node v, a dashed arrow indicates to which species tree node γ(v)it is mapped by the
duplication–loss scenario computed by Algorithm 11.8.3.
Application of this algorithm to the species tree and gene tree shown inFigure 11.18a–b gives rise to a reconciliation that uses only one duplication and
one loss, which is caused by the node labeled oin Figure 11.18b. The resulting
optimal duplication–loss reconciliation is shown in Figure 11.19.
Exercise 11.8.4 (Duplication–loss scenario) Determine the number of speciations,
duplications and losses associated with the duplication–loss scenario depicted inFigure 11.20.
11.8.2 Duplication, loss and transfer
LetTbe a gene tree and Tspas p e c i e st r e eo n X. The problem of reconciling the two
trees becomes signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult once we allow horizontal gene transfer(HGT) events. The history of a gene can be very complicated, for example, the genemay transfer back and forth between different lineages many times, as indicated inFigure 11.21. Moreover, there are time constraints to consider, because a gene can
only be transferred between two species that exist at the same time.
There are very many possible reconciliations of Tand T
spusing DLT events.
Our goal is to determine a reconciliation that uses only a minimum number ofduplications and transfers. This allows us to ignore all those reconciliations that

294 Phylogenetic networks from trees
e d c b a
Figure 11.21 A complicated gene history involving many transfers.
cannot be minimum, or are not distinguishable from a simpler one based on thegiven input data. T o this end, we make the following simplifying assumptions:
(i) A transfer edge einTalways starts in one species-tree edge f, connects directly
to a second species-tree edge gand terminates there. In other words, we do
not allow a transfer edge to continue through multiple species-tree edges, asis the case in Figure 11.22a.
(ii) The two species-tree edges fand gthat a transfer edge estarts and ends in
must be incomparable in T
sp, thus ruling out transfers between ancestors and
descendants, such as in Figure 11.22b.
(iii) A transfer event always starts directly at the source node of a transfer edge e,
thus excluding the situation illustrated in Figure 11.22c.
(iv) A gene-tree node vmay only be the source of at most one transfer edge, ruling
out the situation shown in Figure 11.22d.
These assumptions allow us to specify a DLT scenario by determining a mapping ofthe gene-tree nodes to the species-tree nodes; a partitioning of the gene-tree nodesinto three types of nodes, namely speciation, duplication and transfer nodes; anda speciﬁcation of the transfer edges. Here is a formal deﬁnition [ 237]:
Deﬁnition 11.8.5 (DLT scenario) ADLT scenario Z for a gene tree T and a species
tree T
sponXis given by:
/squaresolida mapping γof the gene-tree nodes to the species-tree nodes,
/squaresolida partitioning of the set of gene-tree internal nodes into three sets V s,Vdand V t,
called the sets of speciation ,duplication and transfer nodes , respectively, and
/squaresolidas e tE tof transfer edges in T.
These sets must fulﬁll the following conditions:
(i)Ifvis a leaf of T with taxon label x, then γ(v)is a leaf of T spwith the same
taxon label x.
(ii)If u is an internal gene-tree node with children vandw,t h e n :
(a)The node γ(u)is not a proper descendant of γ(v)orγ(w).
(b)At least one of γ(v)andγ(w)is a descendant of γ(u).

295 11.8 DLT reconciliation of gene and species trees
e d c b a e d c b a
(a) Back and forth
e d c b a*
e d c b a*
(c) Duplication and transfer(a) Transfer to descendant
(d) Double transfer
Figure 11.22 Here we show four different kinds of transfers (highlighted in bold) that cannot be identified
by the comparison of a gene tree and a species tree and are therefore not represented bya DLT scenario.
(iii) A gene-tree edge (v,w )is contained in E t, if and only if γ(v)andγ(w)are
incomparable.
(iv) If u is an internal gene-tree node with children vandw,t h e n :
(a)The node u is contained in V t, if and only if either (u,v)is contained in E t
or(u,w)is contained in E t.
(b)The node u is contained in V s,o n l yi fγ (u)=lca(γ (v),γ(w))and the two
nodesγ(v)andγ(w)are incomparable.
(c)The node u is contained in V d,o n l yi fγ (u)is an ancestor of lca(γ(v),γ(w)).
LetTbe a gene tree and Tspas p e c i e st r e eo n X.I naD L Ts c e n a r i o Zwe represent
a gene transfer by a gene-tree edge e=(u,v). How do we determine which two
species-tree edges this transfer edge connects?
The transfer edge e“takes off” from the species-tree edge fthat leads into γ(u).
The “landing place” of a transfer edge e=(u,v) in the species-tree is not uniquely
deﬁned and we allow it to lie on any species-tree edge on the species-tree path fromlca(γ(u),γ(v)) down to the node γ(v). Additional constraints on the possible
landing places come into play when we restrict our attention to so-called “acyclic”DLT scenarios further below.
Given a gene tree and a species tree on X,o u rc o m p u t a t i o n a lg o a li st oﬁ n d
a DLT scenario that reconciles the two given trees and uses a minimum numberof duplications and transfers. Note that we do not seek to minimize the number

296 Phylogenetic networks from trees
of losses. Determining the number of losses that are implied by a DLT scenario ismore complicated than in the case of duplication–loss scenarios. Not only do wehave to look at each gene-tree edge that is not a transfer edge and check whetherit continues through a species-tree node (as in Section 11.8.1) ,b u tw ea l s oh a v et o
take transfer edges into account. The number of losses implied by a transfer edgedepends on its actual landing place.Problem 11.8.6 (Minimum DLT scenario) Let T be a gene tree and T
spa species tree
onX. Determine a DLT scenario for the two trees for which the number of duplication
and transfer nodes given by |Vd|+| Vt|is minimized.
This problem can be solved efﬁciently, as we describe in the following subsection.However, our deﬁnition of a DLT scenario is perhaps a little too general, as it allowsconﬁgurations that are temporally infeasible in the sense that one cannot assigntime stamps to nodes and transfers such that all transfers happen between speciesthat exist at the same time (see Figure 11.23). As we discuss further below, if we
seek to rule out such DLT scenarios by restricting our attention to acyclic ones, then
the problem of ﬁnding a DLT scenario that minimizes duplications and transfersbecomes NP-hard.
Computation of a minimum DLT scenario
LetTbe a gene tree and Tspa species tree on X. We use Tvto denote the subtree
of the gene tree Tthat is rooted at the node v. A minimum DLT scenario for the
two trees can be computed efﬁciently using dynamic programming, as we nowdescribe.
We deﬁne c(u,p)a st h em i n i m u mc o s to fa n yD L Ts c e n a r i of o r T
uand Tspsuch
that the gene-tree node uis mapped onto the species-tree node p.A n ys u c hD L T
scenario classiﬁes the node ueither as a speciation, duplication or transfer node,
and so the value c(u,p) arises as the minimum of three minimum costs, namely
cs(u,p),cd(u,p)a n d ct(u,p), respectively. These cost functions are deﬁned and
linked by the following recursion:
Ifuis a leaf of T,t h e nw es e t
c(u,p)=/braceleftBigg
0i f uand phave the same taxon label,
∞ else.(11.9)
Otherwise, uis an internal node of Twith children vandw, and we set
c(u,p)=min{cs(u,p),cd(u,p),ct(u,p)}, (11.10)

297 11.8 DLT reconciliation of gene and species trees
where
cs(u,p)=/braceleftBigg
min{c (v,q)+c(w,r)|r⊥qand lca( q,r)=p}ifpinternal,
∞ else,
cd(u,p)=min{1 +c(v,q)+c(w,r)|p≤qand p≤r}, and
ct(u,p)=min{1+c(v,q)+c(w,r)|p≤qand p⊥r}. (11.11)
Here, for two species-tree nodes qandrwe use the notation q⊥rto indicate that
qand rare incomparable in Tspand we use r≤qto indicate that ris an ancestor
ofq.
The minimum cost of a DLT scenario for Tand Tspis then obtained by deter-
mining the best score for the root ρTofT,g i v e nb y
min{c (ρT,p)|pis a node of Tsp}. (11.12)
This recursion can be solved using the following algorithm.
Algorithm 11.8.7 (Minimum DLT scenario) For a given gene tree T and species
tree T sponX, the minimum cost of any DLT scenario for the two trees is computed as
follows.
Initialize c (u,p)=∞ for all gene-tree nodes u and species-tree nodes p. Set
c(u,p)=0for all pairs of leaf nodes that are labeled by the same taxon.
For each internal gene-tree node u in a post-order traversal, consider all species-tree
nodes p in a post-order traversal and perform the following steps:
/squaresolidLetvandwbe the two children of u.
/squaresolidIf p is an internal node, then let q and r be the two children of p and set
cs=min/parenleftbig
min
q≤q/primec(v,q/prime)+min
r≤r/primec(w,r/prime),min
q≤q/primec(w,q/prime)+min
r≤r/primec(v,r/prime)/parenrightbig
.
(11.13)
/squaresolidOtherwise, p is a leaf and set c s=∞ .
/squaresolidSet c d=min p≤p/primec(v,p/prime)+min p≤p/primec(w, p/prime)+1.
/squaresolidSet c t=min/parenleftbig
min p≤p/primec(v,p/prime)+min p⊥p/primec(w, p/prime),min p≤p/primec(w, p/prime)+
min p⊥p/primec(v,p/prime)/parenrightbig
+1.
/squaresolidSet c (u,p)=min{c s,cd,ct}.
Return min pinTspc(ρT,p).
Once we have determined the minimum possible score, a concrete DLT scenariothat attains the optimal score can be determined by performing a recursive traceback
in which for each internal gene-tree node uwe determine which species-tree node p
and which of the three functions c
s,cdorctwas used to obtain the ﬁnal minimum.

298 Phylogenetic networks from trees
We then set γ(u)=pand classify uas a species, duplication or transfer node,
accordingly. Note that this algorithm can be extended to weight duplications andtransfers differently.
Acyclic DLT scenarios
LetTb eag e n et r e ea n d Tspas p e c i e st r e eo n X. In the deﬁnition of a DLT scenario
forTand Tspwe explicitly excluded the possibility of a transfer between an ancestor
and one of its descendants. This restriction can be justiﬁed by arguing that speciesmust exist at the same time for a horizontal gene transfer to be able to happenbetween them. (While the latter argument looks reasonable at ﬁrst glance, it caneasily be refuted by allowing for the existence of additional species that are not partof the taxon set under consideration. In this case, a transfer between between anode and a descendant should be counted as at least two events.) We refer to thisrequirement as temporal feasibility , which essentially means that one can assign
time stamps to the nodes of both trees in such a way that transfers occur onlybetween coexisting nodes.
Unfortunately, temporal feasibility can be affected by a chain of multiple trans-
fers, even if each of the transfers involved is temporally feasible on its own. T oaddress this problem we now introduce the concept of an acyclic DLT scenario that
ensures that a reconciliation of a gene tree and a species tree is always temporally
feasible.Deﬁnition 11.8.8 (Acyclic DLT scenario) Let T be a gene tree and T
spa species tree
onX.AD L Ts c e n a r i oZf o rTa n dT spis called acyclic, if we can assign a unique
number π(v)to every node vof the species tree T spin such a way that we have:
(i)The number π(v)of any node vis less than the number of any of its children.
(ii)If e=(u,v)and e/prime=(u/prime,v/prime)are two transfer edges in T and if v/primeis a descendant
ofvor equal to v(thus allowing e =e/prime), then the number π(p)assigned to the
parent p of γ(u)is less than the number π(γ(v/prime)).
In particular, the second condition in the deﬁnition states that if one transfer edgeein the gene tree Tis followed by a second transfer edge e
/prime, then the landing place
ofe/primein the species tree Tspi sn o ta l l o w e dt ol i ea b o v et h ep a r e n to ft h et a k eo f fp l a c e
ofe, as this would give rise to a cycle. In Figure 11.23, we display an example of the
kind of conﬁguration that this deﬁnition excludes.
LetTbe a gene tree and Tspa species tree on X. Unfortunately, the problem of
computing an acyclic DLT scenario for Tand Tspof minimum cost is known to be
NP-hard, as shown in [237 ]. However, in that paper it is also stated that optimal
DLT scenarios are usually acyclic anyway and so in practice it may be sufﬁcient touse Algorithm 11.8.7.

299 11.8 DLT reconciliation of gene and species trees
e d c b a1
23
4uu´v v´
5
g fTsp
T
ee´0
Figure 11.23 A DLT scenario with species tree Tsp(in gray) and gene tree T(in black). The internal nodes
of the species tree Tspare numbered in accordance with condition (i) of the definition of
an acylic DLT scenario, whereas the nodes of two transfer edges eand e/primeare labeled u,v,
u/primeandv/prime, respectively, fulfilling the prerequisite of condition (ii). Note that the parent pof
the node γ(u)is equal to γ(v/prime)and thus the two nodes pandγ(v/prime)have the same number,
two. In consequence, condition (ii) is violated and so the depicted DLT scenario is cyclic.
11.8.3 Application
Due to the lack of a suitable implementation, the described algorithm for computinga DLT scenario is currently not used in practice. However, DLT scenarios are ofpractical interest and in Figure 4.6we show a published example that is based on
the tad locus of the human pathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans [197].
The network was constructed with the help of the TreeMapper software [ 48], see
Section 14.5.
Chapter notes
Consensus split networks were introduced in [113 ]. The Z-closure method and
ﬁltered super networks were introduced in [ 126], [132]a n d[ 243]. The section on
minimum hybridization networks is based on [ 15,24,25,26]. Multi-labeled trees
are discussed in [ 117]a n d[ 22]. The section on DLT reconciliation is based on
[100 ,237,238]. Other work in this area includes [ 48,86].
The split-based networks described in this chapter were all implemented in
SplitsTree [ 125]. The nested-label algorithm for multi-labeled trees is available in
PADRE [ 167] and also in Dendroscope [120 ], and the latter program also contains
the cluster-based algorithm, too.

12
Phylogenetic networks from triplesor quartets
In this chapter, we look at some methods for computing rooted phylogeneticnetworks from rooted triples and unrooted phylogenetic networks from unrootedquartet topologies.
12.1 Trees from rooted triples
Arooted triple is given by a bifurcating, rooted phylogenetic tree on a set of three
taxa{x,y,z}.W ew r i t eyz
xto indicate that the most recent common ancestor of
yand zis more recent than that of xand y,o r xand z. There are three possible
rooted bifurcating trees, and consequently rooted triples, on a set of three taxa (seeFigure 12.1).
LetTb ear o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i ct r e eo nX . We use T|
{x,y,z}to denote the restriction
ofTto the three leaves labeled by {x,y,z}(see Deﬁnition 3.16.3). We say that a
rooted triple ton three taxa x,y,ziscontained inT,i ft h er e s t r i c t i o n T|{x,y,z}
equals t.
Any rooted tree Tcan be unambiguously described by its rooted triple encoding
R(T) (see, for example, [ 94]).
Deﬁnition 12.1.1 (Rooted triple encoding) Let T be a rooted phylogenetic tree
onX. The set R (T)of all rooted triples contained in T is called the rooted triple
encoding of T.
Given a rooted phylogenetic tree TonX, one can easily produce the set R(T)o f
rooted triples contained in Tin a single traversal of the tree: At each node vrecord
all rooted triplesyz
xsuch that xdoes not label a descendant of v,w h e r e a s yand z
label descendants of two different children of v.
Now, assume that we are given a set of rooted triples RonX.H o wt od e t e r m i n e
whether Ris the rooted triple encoding of some unknown rooted phylogenetic tree
TonX? Moreover, if such a tree exists, how do we compute it? T o address these
two questions, we introduce the following:
300

301 12.1 Trees from rooted triples
xz y yz x zy x
(a)yz
x(b)xz
y(c)xy
z
Figure 12.1 The three possible rooted triples on a set of three taxa {x,y,z}.
af e d c bab
cab
dab
eab
f
cd
acd
bcd
ecd
f
ef
aef
bef
cef
da—bc —de —f
(a) T ree T (b) Rooted triples in T (c) Aho graph
Figure 12.2 (a) A rooted phylogenetic tree TonX={a,b,c,d,e,f}.( b )T h es e t Rof all 12 rooted
triples contained in T. (c) The Aho graph AG(R)forR.
Deﬁnition 12.1.2 (Aho graph) Let R be a set of rooted triples on X. The Aho graph
AG(R)=(V,E)associated with R has node set V =Xand any two nodes y and z
are connected by an edge in E if and only if there exists a third taxon x such that therooted triple
yz
xis present in R.
See Figure 12.2c for an example of the Aho graph.
The Aho algorithm [3] below builds a tree top-down from the root to the leaves,
in terms of clusters ﬁrst identifying the largest clusters, then those contained inthem, and so on. The algorithm is guided by the Aho graph, operating on smallerand smaller induced sets of rooted triples.
LetRbe a set of rooted triples on Xand let X
/primebe a subset of X.T h es e t R|X/primeof
rooted triples induced byX/primeconsists of all rooted triplesyz
x∈Rfor which all three
taxa x,y,zare contained in X/prime.
Algorithm 12.1.3 (Aho algorithm) Given a set of rooted triples R on X, the aim is
to construct a rooted phylogenetic tree T on Xthat contains R, if one exists.
IfXcontains only one element, say x, then return the tree consisting of a single
node labeled x.
IfXcontains two elements, say x and y, then return the tree that has two leaves
labeled x and y, respectively.
Otherwise, compute the Aho graph AG (R).
If AG (R)has only one connected component, then the algorithm reports fail.

302 Phylogenetic networks from triples or quartets
Else, for each node set U of a connected component of AG (R), determine the set
of induced rooted triples R |Uand recursively compute the rooted phylogenetic subtree
T(R|U).
Finally, create a root node ρand combine all computed subtrees by connecting ρto
the root of each of them.This classic algorithm computes a minimal rooted phylogenetic tree Tthat contains
a given set of rooted triples R, if one exists, where minimal means that no internal
edge of Tc a nb ec o n t r a c t e ds ot h a tt h er e s u l t i n gt r e ea l s oc o n t a i n s R[213 ]. In
consequence, if Ris the rooted triple encoding for a rooted phylogenetic tree T,t h e
Aho algorithm returns T. Note that, in general, there can be more than one minimal
tree for a given set of rooted triples. It is unknown whether a tree computed by theAho algorithm contains the minimum number of rooted triples.
If no tree containing Rexists, then at some stage the algorithm will report ‘fail’
because an obstruction is encountered, by which we mean an Aho graph that has
only one connected component.
In practice, this algorithm usually reports fail. How to modify it such that it
always produces a useful result? Unfortunately, the problem of constructing arooted phylogenetic tree that contains a maximum subset of Ris known to be
NP-hard [ 30,138, 244]. One heuristic to deal with an encountered obstruction O
is to determine a minimum cut set of edges in Owhose removal will produce a
graph with exactly two connected components. After deletion of these edges thealgorithm can proceed and there is no need to report fail [ 192, 215].
12.2 Level- knetworks from rooted triples
LetRbe a set of rooted triples on X.I fRis not contained in any rooted phylogenetic
tree, then one possibility is to determine a rooted phylogenetic tree that is consistentwith as many rooted triples as possible, as mentioned above. A second alternative isthat we search for a rooted phylogenetic network Nthat contains all rooted triples
inR, in the following sense:
Deﬁnition 12.2.1 (Rooted triples contained in a network) A rooted triple t =
yz
x
is said to be contained in a rooted phylogenetic network N, if there exist two nodes u
andvin N such that the following conditions hold (see Figure 12.3):
(i)There exists a directed path from u to the node labeled x.
(ii)There exists a directed path from u to v.
(iii) There exists a directed path from vt ot h en o d el a b e l e dy .
(iv) There exists a directed path from vt ot h en o d el a b e l e dz .
(v)All four paths are node-disjoint (except at their end-points).

303 12.2 Level- knetworks from rooted triples
c d b acd
acd
bab
c
ab
dac
dbc
d
c d b au
v
(a) Network N (b) Rooted triples R (c)ab
c
Figure 12.3 (a) A rooted phylogenetic network N.( b )T h es e t Rof rooted triples contained in N.( c )T o
show that the rooted tripleab
cis indeed contained in N, here we indicate two nodes uand
vthat are connected to each other and to the leaves labeled a,b,cby four disjoint paths
(highlighted in bold), as required by Definition 12.2.1.
a
dcba
dcba
dcba
dcb
Network N (b) (a)bc
a(c)ac
b(d)ab
c
Figure 12.4 (a) A phylogenetic network Ncontaining all possible rooted triples on X={a,b,c,d}.F o r
example, all three possible rooted triples on a,b,care highlighted in (b), (c) and (d).
This construction is easily generalized to a taxon set of arbitrary size by adding more taxabelow d.
An equivalent formulation of this deﬁnition is the following: we say that a rootedtriple tis contained in a rooted phylogenetic network N,w h e n e v e rt is contained
in some rooted phylogenetic tree Tthat is contained in N.
It is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd a rooted phylogenetic network Nthat contains a given
set of rooted triples RonX. Indeed, Figure 12.4 shows how to construct a rooted
phylogenetic network that contains all possible rooted triples on X.H o w e v e r ,a
network obtained in this way is not informative, as it contains all three possible
rooted triples for any given set of three taxa.
T o obtain a more useful network, we restrict our attention to phylogenetic
networks of limited complexity. More precisely, we consider level- knetworks for
some small value of k.R e c a l lf r o mD e ﬁ n i t i o n6.11.5 that a bicombining, rooted
phylogenetic network has level k, if the number of reticulations in any biconnected
component of the network is at most k.
In the previous section we saw that we can use the Aho algorithm to efﬁciently
decide whether a rooted phylogenetic tree exists that contains a given set of rooted

304 Phylogenetic networks from triples or quartets
triples RonX. Unfortunately, for k≥1 the problem to decide whether there exists
al e v e l - knetwork Nthat contains Ris NP-hard, in general [ 139].
T o obtain a tractable problem, consider the following deﬁnition. A set of rooted
triples RonXis called dense , if for every set of three taxa {x,y,z}the set R
contains at least one of the three possible rooted triples,yz
x,xz
yorxy
z.
If a dense set of rooted triples Rcontains more than one of the three possibilities
for some set of three taxa, then we can be sure that Ris not contained in some tree.
However, the converse does not hold. Even if Rcontains at most one rooted triple
for every choice of three taxa in X, it may still be the case that Ris not contained
in any rooted phylogenetic tree.Exercise 12.2.2 (Non-treelike dense triples) Design a dense set of rooted triples R
on four taxa such that each set of three taxa appears only once and R is not containedin any rooted phylogenetic tree.For a dense set of rooted triples R, the problem of deciding whether there exists a
level-k network Nthat contains Ris computationally tractable:
Theorem 12.2.3 (Level-k networks from dense rooted triples) Let R be a dense set
of rooted triples on X. For any ﬁxed number k ≥0, to decide whether a level-k rooted
phylogenetic network exists that contains R takes only polynomial time.We do not prove this result here. A proof for k=1 can be found in [ 140], for
k=2i n[ 133], and for all kin [236]. In order to give a ﬂavor of the approach,
in the next section we discuss the problem of computing a level-1 network for agiven set of rooted triples. The key idea is to modify the Aho algorithm ( 12.1.3)
so as to attempt to resolve each encountered obstruction by postulating a singlereticulation. T o formulate this, we need to introduce the concept of a “collapsible”set of taxa.Deﬁnition 12.2.4 (Collapsible with respect to R) Let R be a set of rooted triples on
X.As e to ft a x aY ⊂Xis called collapsible (with respect to R), if for every rooted
triple
yz
xin R we have: if x and y are contained in Y , then so is z.
LetRbe an arbitrary set of rooted triples on X. By deﬁnition, every single element
subset {x}ofXis trivially collapsible, as is Xitself. Now, consider the set R
of all rooted triples contained in the rooted phylogenetic network NonX=
{a,b,c,d}shown in Figure 12.3. Which collapsible sets does Rcontain in addition
to the trivial ones just mentioned? Only {a,b}. All other proper subsets of R,
namely {b,c},{b,c,d},...,{b ,c,d}are not collapsible. For example, Y={b,c}
is not collapsible with respect to Rbecausecd
b∈Rimplies that Ymust also
contain d.

305 12.2 Level- knetworks from rooted triples
Lemma 12.2.5 (Collapsible sets for dense triples are compatible) Let R be a dense
set of rooted triples on X. Any two collapsible sets of R are compatible (in the sense of
clusters).Proof LetRbe a dense set of rooted triples on X. Assume there exist two collapsible
setsY
1andY2that are not compatible, that is, for which Y1−Y2/negationslash=∅,Y2−Y1/negationslash=∅,
and Y1∩Y2/negationslash=∅ hold. Choose three taxa x∈Y1−Y2,y∈Y2−Y1,a n d z∈Y1∩
Y2.A s Ris dense, the set Rmust contain at least one rooted triple ton{x,y,z}.
There are three possibilities for t, namely t=yz
x,t=xy
zort=xz
y.I nt h eﬁ r s tt w o
cases, because x,z∈Y1andY1is collapsible, we must have y∈Y1, a contradiction.
In the third case, because y,z∈Y2andY2is collapsible, we must have x∈Y2,a g a i n
obtaining a contradiction. /square
IfRis not dense, then two different sets that are collapsible (with respect to R)
are not necessarily compatible, even if Ris contained in a rooted phylogenetic tree.
In this case, the tree must contain a node uof outdegree greater than two and any
three taxa x,y,zthat label leaves contained in different subtrees below uwill not
be present in a rooted triple in R.
For example, the root node ρof the tree Tdisplayed in Figure 12.2 has outdegree
three. So, the set of rooted triples displayed by Tdoes not contain any rooted triple
onx,y,zwith x∈{a,b},y∈{c,d}and z∈{e,f}.P l e a s ec o n v i n c ey o u r s e l ft h a t
Y1={a,b,c,d}andY2={c,d,e,f}are two collapsible sets that are incompatible
with each other.
12.2.1 Computing a level-1 network
LetRbe a dense set of rooted triples on X. We now want to discuss how to compute
al e v e l - 1n e t w o r k Nthat contains R,i fo n ee x i s t s( r e c a l lt h a tal e v e l - 1n e t w o r ki sa
galled tree). When running the Aho algorithm, there are only two cases to consider:Lemma 12.2.6 (Number of components on dense triples) Let R be a dense set of
rooted triples on X. The number of connected components of the Aho graph AG (R)
is at most two.Proof The Aho graph AG(R) cannot have more than two components, because,
by deﬁnition of the graph, any three taxa chosen from three different componentsdo not correspond to a rooted triple in R. This contradicts the assumption that R
is dense.
/square
LetRbe a dense set of rooted triples on Xand assume that the Aho graph
AG(R) has only one component. We shall attempt to resolve this obstruction by
postulating a reticulation event, as described in the following.

306 Phylogenetic networks from triples or quartets
LetH={H1,···,Hk}denote the set of all maximal proper subsets of Xthat
are collapsible with respect to R.N o t et h a ta n yt w os e t si n Hare disjoint, because
His compatible by Lemma 12.2.5,a n dt h a tH coversX, because {x}is collapsible,
for any taxon x.
The ﬁrst step is to collapse each collapsible set Hi∈Hby setting X/prime=Hand
deﬁning the set of rooted triples on X/primeas:
R/prime=/braceleftbiggHyHz
Hx|Hx,Hy,Hz∈X/prime,∃x∈Hx,y∈Hy,z∈Hzwithyz
x∈R/bracerightbigg
.
(12.1)
Next, for each choice of a taxon Hr∈X/prime,w ed ot h ef o l l o w i n g .R e m o v e Hrfrom
X/primeand remove all rooted triples involving Hrfrom R/prime. Run the Aho algorithm on
the resulting set of rooted triples R/prime/primeto determine whether there exists a rooted
phylogenetic tree Tthat contains R/prime/prime. If such a tree exists, then attempt to attach
Hrto the tree Tusing two new edges in such a way that all rooted triples in R/primethat
involve Hrare contained in the resulting network N.
If we are unable to identify such a reticulate taxon Hr, then we cannot resolve the
obstruction and the algorithm returns fail. In this case, no level-1 network exists
that contains the set Rof rooted triples.
On the other hand, if we are successful, then the original obstruction has been
overcome by attaching taxon Hras a reticulate node. In this case, for each collapsed
taxon Hi∈X/prime, we run the algorithm on the set of taxa Hi/subsetnoteqlXand set of induced
rooted triples R|Hi/subsetnoteqlRto obtain a level-1 network NHi. If this, in turn, is successful,
then we replace HibyNHiinN.
Here is a summary of the algorithm described in [ 134]:
Algorithm 12.2.7 (Level-1 from dense rooted triples) Given a dense set of rooted
triples R on X,t h ea i mi st oc o n s t r u c tal e v e l - 1network N that contains R, if one
exists.
IfXcontains only one element, x, then return the tree consisting of a single node
labeled x.
Otherwise, compute the Aho graph AG (R).
If AG (R)has only one connected component, then attempt to resolve the obstruction
by collapsing collapsible sets of taxa and then postulating an appropriate reticulation, asdescribed above. If this is not possible, the algorithm reports fail. Otherwise, recursively
run the algorithm on each collapsed set of taxa.
Else, the graph AG (R)must have two connected components. Recursively compute
an e t w o r kf o re a c ho ft h e m .
Create a root node ρand connect it to the roots of the recursively computed networks.

307 12.2 Level- knetworks from rooted triples
Figure 12.5 An example of how the level-1 algorithm works. (a) A dense set of rooted triples Ron
X={a,b,c,d}. (b) The Aho graph AG(R). (c) There are three collapsible, maximal proper
subsets in X,H1={a,b},H2={c},and H3={d}. Collapsing them produces the taxon set
X/primeand dense set of rooted triples R/prime.( d )I fw er e m o v e H2fromX/primethen the remaining two
taxa H1and H3can be fitted onto a tree T. (e) Attaching H2, as shown here, produces a
network that contains R/prime. (f) After uncollapsing X/primewe obtain the final phylogenetic network
N.
We illustrate the algorithm in Figure 12.5. We start with the dense set of rooted
triples RonX={a,b,c,d}shown in Figure 12.5a. The Aho graph AG(R)i s
connected, so Rcannot be represented by a tree and we must attempt to resolve
the obstruction by postulating a reticulation. T o this end, we identify the set H
of all collapsible, maximal proper subsets of X. There is only one non-trivial
collapsible subset, namely {a,b}, and two trivial ones, {c}and{d}. We construct
at a x o ns e t X/primein which each taxon is one of the three sets in H,w h i c hw ed e n o t e
byH1={a,b},H2={c}and H3={d}. The corresponding set of rooted triples
is given by R/prime={H2H3
H1,H1H2
H3}. This set is obtained by replacing all occurrences
ofaorbinRbyH1, all occurrences of cbyH2and all occurrences of dby
H3,i nR.
Removal of any of the three taxa in X/primeleads to a set of two taxa, which can
always be represented by a tree. If we remove H2and then attach it by two edges,
as shown in Figure 12.5e, then we obtain a network that contains all rooted triples
inR/prime. Then, expanding the collapsed set H1={a,b}gives rise to the ﬁnal out-
put of the algorithm, a bifurcating level-1 network Nthat contains R,s h o w ni n
Figure 12.5f.
The above algorithm will ﬁnd a level-1 network representing R, if one exists.
However, as formulated, it is not guaranteed to ﬁnd a level-1 network that containsonly a minimum number of reticulations. Superﬂuous reticulations occur whenthe postulated reticulate taxon is a collapsed set of taxa that contains some original

308 Phylogenetic networks from triples or quartets
ab
ecd
ede
c
be
aab
cab
d
cd
acd
bce
a
ce
bde
ade
ba
edcba
edcb
(a) Rooted triples R (b) Network N1 (c) Network N2
Figure 12.6 For the set of rooted triples Rshown in (a), Algorithm 12.2.7 produces the level-1 network
N1shown in (b). A simple modification of the algorithm described in the text is necessary
to obtain a level-1 network N2that minimizes the number of reticulations, as displayed
in (c).
taxa that do not necessarily have to be placed below the reticulation. Consider, forexample, the input set of rooted triples Rlisted in Figure 12.6a. Algorithm 12.2.7
collapses the collapsible subset {c,d,e}of taxa and then constructs the network N
1
shown in Figure 12.6b, which has two reticulations. This network contains R,b u t
is not minimum, because the network N2in Figure 12.6c has only one reticulation
and also contains R.
Algorithm 12.2.7 can be modiﬁed so as to always construct a level-1 network
containing a minimum number of reticulations (if such a network exists). Themodiﬁed version loops through all collapsible subsets H
/prime
rof the postulated reticulate
taxon Hrand attempts to place H/prime
r, instead of Hr, below the reticulation. In the
example displayed in Figure 12.6, H/prime
r={e}is a collapsible subset of Hr={c,d,e}
and putting ebelow a reticulation leads to the minimum network N/primethat is
displayed in Figure 12.6c. A dynamic programming algorithm can be used to ﬁnd
such an optimal network in polynomial time [ 134].
The described algorithm for constructing a level-1 network for a dense set of
rooted triples R,i fo n ee x i s t s ,c a nb eg e n e r a l i z e dt ol e v e l - 2 .I n[ 236], the authors
describe an algorithm to compute in polynomial time, for every ﬁxed k, the level-k
network with minimum number of reticulations (if such a network exists).
12.3 The quartet-net method
The quartet-net method (orQNet , for short) [ 91] ,t a k e sa si n p u tac o l l e c t i o no f
weighted quartet topologies on Xand produces as output a set of weighted splits
onX={x1,..., xn}that is circular, using a modiﬁcation of the neighbor-net
method, which is described in Section 10.4.
More precisely, for every quadruple Q={w,x,y,z}⊆Xof four distinct taxa
the input must provide a non-negative weight ω(ˆQ) for each of the three possible
non-trivial splits (called quartet topologies )ˆQ, namely{w,x}
{y,z},{w,y}
{x,z}and{w,z}
{x,y}. Just as
the neighbor-net method, the quartet-net method proceeds in three steps:

309 12.3 The quartet-net method
(i) The main computation is to determine a circular ordering ZofX.
(ii) Then a set of weighted splits Sis computed that respect the circular ordering
Z.
(iii) Finally, the splits are processed by the circular network algorithm so as to
obtain a split network N.
We assume that the reader is already familiar with our description of the neighbor-net method (see Section 10.4) and so this exposition is quite brief. Just as the
neighbor-net method, the algorithm uses an auxiliary graph Gwhose node set is
given by X. Initially, the graph consists of nisolated nodes x
1,..., xn.
Whereas the neighbor-net method maintains the graph Gas a collection of
isolated nodes (“singles”) and pairs of nodes connected by an edge (“couples”), thequartet-net method never removes any nodes but rather maintains Gas a collection
of paths and isolated nodes.
While the auxiliary graph Gstill consists of four or more connected components,
the algorithm repeatedly does the following:
Choose a pair of paths P
iand PjinGthat maximizes the following paths score:
ps(Pi,Pj)=/summationdisplay
Pk/negationslash=Pi,Pj
Pl/negationslash=Pi,Pj/summationdisplay
xi∈Pi,xj∈Pj,
xk∈Pk,xl∈Plω/parenleftBig
{xi,xj}
{xk,xl}/parenrightBig
|Pi||Pj||Pk||Pl|, (12.2)
where the ﬁrst sum is over all pairs of other paths Pkand Pland the second sum
is over all choices of taxa, one from each path. Here |Pi|denotes the number of
nodes of the path Pi.
The next step is to decide which ends of the two paths are to be joined together
by a new edge to merge the two paths. T o discuss this, let us assume that the nodesin the two paths P
iand Pjare labeled as follows:
us−us−1−···− u1−u0andv0−v1−···− vt−1−vt,
and that our goal is to evaluate the choice of connecting nodes u0andv0to obtain
an e wc h a i n
us−us−1−···− u1−u0−v0−v1−···− vt−1−vt.
The ends score for this choice is obtained as the sum of weights over all quadruples
that have three or four taxa in the new path and are compatible with the path:
es(u0,v0)=/summationtext
0≤k<l≤s/summationtext
0≤p≤t/summationtext
x∈X−(Pi∪Pj)ω/parenleftBig
{uk,vp}
{ul,x}/parenrightBig
+/summationtext
0≤p≤s/summationtext
0≤k<l≤t/summationtext
x∈X−(Pi∪Pj)ω/parenleftBig
{up,vk}
{vl,x}/parenrightBig
+/summationtext
0≤k<l≤s/summationtext
0≤p<q≤tω/parenleftBig
{uk,vp}
{ul,vq}/parenrightBig
.(12.3)
The two ends that give rise to the largest score are merged.

310 Phylogenetic networks from triples or quartets
When only three connected components are left in the graph, then we do not
use the paths score to determine which two paths are to be merged next, but ratherfor each of the (up to) eight possible pairings of the (up to) six different path ends,we use the ends scores to decide how to merge all three components into a singlecycle Z.
Once the circular ordering Z=(x
1,x2,..., xn) has been computed in this way,
we construct the set Sof all/parenleftbign
2/parenrightbig
−nnon-trivial splits on Xthat respect the circular
ordering Z, just as in the neighbor-net method. Note that the quartet-net method
does not provide any information on the weights of the ntrivial splits.
The weights of the splits in Sare calculated using the least squares method. T o
this end, we represent the quartet weights as a 3/parenleftbign
4/parenrightbig
-dimensional vector
w=ω/parenleftBig
{x1,x2}
{x3,x4}/parenrightBig
ω/parenleftBig
{x1,x2}
{x3,x5}/parenrightBig
...
ω/parenleftBig
{xn−3,xn−2}
{xn−1xn}/parenrightBig. (12.4)
The set of quartets is represented by an 3/parenleftbig
n
4/parenrightbig
×/parenleftbig/parenleftbign
2/parenrightbig
−n/parenrightbig
-dimensional matrix A
in which each row of Acorresponds to a quartet and each column corresponds to
a split, that is,
A(i,j,k,l)t=/braceleftBigg
1i f{xi,xj}
{xk,xl}=St|{xi,xj,xk,xl},
0e l s e .(12.5)
Letbbe the/parenleftbign
2/parenrightbig
-dimensional vector representing the weights of the splits. The
ordinary least square estimate of bis given by
b=(ATA)−1ATw. (12.6)
Again, as in the case of the neighbor-net method, we are more interested in solvingthe least-squares approximation under the constraint that all entries of the solutionvector are non-negative.
Finally, the circular ordering Zand set of splits Sare passed to the circular
network algorithm (see Section 7.2) to compute an actual split network N.W e
have the following result:Theorem 12.3.1 (Consistency of quartet-net) LetQbe a collection of weighted
quartet trees on Xarising from a distance matrix D. The set of weighted splits S
computed by quartet-net represents D if and only if D is circular.
The proof of this result can be found in [93]. Because compatible splits are
always circular, it follows that the quartet-net method (combined with the circular

311 12.3 The quartet-net method
network algorithm) always computes the correct phylogenetic tree, when given aninput set that corresponds to a tree.
Chapter notes
The two methods described in this chapter, which construct a phylogenetic networkdirectly from triples or quartets, are both very recent and so far have not been usedin any biological studies. Moreover, actual rooted triple sets are rarely dense sothe algorithms presented in Section 12.2 may be of limited use in practice. An
alternative approach is to construct a level- knetwork that is consistent with as
many of the input triples as possible, relaxing the requirement that the input set bedense. This is a NP-hard problem and a heuristic for k=1 can be found in [ 115].
If given a dense set of triples that is fully consistent with some level-1 network, thisalgorithm computes such a network. Otherwise, it produces a level-1 network thatis guaranteed to be consistent with at least
5
12of the input triples.

13
Drawing phylogenetic networks
The algorithms presented in the previous chapters compute a phylogenetic tree ornetwork as a labeled graph, possibly with edge lengths. In this chapter, we discussthe problem of assigning coordinates to the nodes (and sometimes also to pointsalong the edges) of a given phylogenetic tree or network so that it can be drawn bya computer program. The results presented here are based on [ 62,77,124].
13.1 Overview
Figure 13.1 shows the relationships between some of the main concepts introduced
in this chapter. The focus of this chapter is on how to draw phylogenetic trees and
networks.
Arooted n e t w o r ko rt r e ec a nb ed e p i c t e de i t h e ra sa phylogram ,i nw h i c ht h e
edges are drawn to scale and thus represent, for example, distances or the numberof mutations along an edge, or as a cladogram , which aims at representing only
the topology of the network. Both types of drawings come in a number of differ-ent variants, including triangular ,rectangular and circular diagrams. We need to
distinguish between a combining view and a transfer view of a rooted phylogenetic
network. In the former, all in-edges of a reticulate node are drawn as reticulateedges, whereas as in the latter one in-edge is drawn as a tree edge and all otherin-edges are drawn as directed edges that indicate transfer events ,s e eS e c t i o n 13.6.
Anunrooted network or tree is usually drawn to scale as a radial diagram.
We ﬁrst discuss algorithms for drawing trees and then modify these so as to
obtain algorithms for drawing phylogenetic networks. We do this in detail for thecombining view of rooted phylogenetic networks and then indicate the modiﬁca-tions necessary to accommodate the transfer view, too.
13.2 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic trees
In the context of phylogenetic trees, a cladogram is a representation of a rooted
phylogenetic tree in which the main goal is to show the topology of the tree as
312

313 13.2 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic trees
Figure 13.1 Overview of the main concepts introduced in this chapter.
clearly as possible, in particular, showing how clusters are nested within each other.Usually, the leaves of the tree are equally spaced along a base-line or around a circle(see Figure 13.2) and the internal nodes of the tree are placed at different levels that
indicate how near (in terms of the number of intermediate edges) they are to theleaves of the tree. Edge lengths are chosen to facilitate this and are not interpreted,for example, in terms of distance or mutations.
LetTbe a rooted phylogenetic tree on a taxon set X, with root ρ.A su s u a l ,w e
assume that all edges of Tare directed away from the root. The level of a node v
is deﬁned as follows: if vis a leaf, then we set level
T(v)=0, and otherwise we set
level T(v) to the maximum number of edges in any path from vto some leaf of T.W e
can compute the levels of all nodes in linear time: in a postorder traversal of T,s e t
the level of any internal node vto the maximum level of any of its children, plus 1.
We deﬁne a topological embedding ofTto be a mapping τthat assigns to each
nodev∈Van ordering τ(v)=(v1,...,v k) of the set of its children {v1,...,v k}.
Any drawing of Tdeﬁnes such a topological embedding: For any node v/negationslash=ρ,
consider a small circle caround v. Starting at the point where cintersects the in-
edge of v, list the target nodes of all out-edges in the order in which you encounter
them when traveling once around cin anti-clockwise order. A similar construction
produces an ordering for the root ρ, but, because the root does not have an in-edge,
one may break the circular ordering around ρat an arbitrary place to obtain a linear
ordering of the children of ρ.
T o construct a cladogram for T, one must ﬁrst determine a topological embed-
dingτforT. Often, this is done only implicitly by using the order in which the
nodes where attached to the tree during computation or input of the tree. Allcladograms for trees can be constructed by some variant of the following basicapproach.Algorithm 13.2.1 (Triangular cladogram for trees) To compute a triangular clado-
gram , as shown in Figure 13.2a, we deﬁne a map κ:V→
R2,κ(v)=(x(v),y(v))

314 Drawing phylogenetic networks
(a) Triangular cladogram (b) Rectangular cladogram
(c) Circular cladogram (d) Inner-circular cladogram
(e) Rectangular phylogram (f) Radial diagram
Figure 13.2 Six different representations of a phylogenetic tree containing mammals and chicken. The
first four diagrams are cladograms, the fifth is a phylogram and the sixth is an unrootedradial diagram.

315 13.2 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic trees
that assigns Cartesian coordinates to each node vin a postorder traversal of the tree
T. Starting at the root ρ, proceed as follows:
(i)Process all children of vin the order prescribed by τ(v)=(v1,...,v k).
(ii)Ifvis a leaf, then set κ(v)=(0,i), where i is the number of leaves visited so far.
(iii) Otherwise, let y minand y maxbe the minimum and maximum y-coordinates of
all leaves below v.S e tκ(v)=(ymin−ymax
2,ymin+ymax
2).
To draw the tree, for each edge (v,w ), draw a line from vtow(that is, from κ(v)to
κ(w),t ob ep r e c i s e ) .
In a triangular cladogram it is desirable that all edges of a bifurcating tree have aslope of the same absolute value and that is why the x-coordinate of a node vis
set to half the distance of the two most distant leaves below v.I no t h e rt y p e so f
cladograms, the x-coordinate of a node vis determined by its level, that is, by that
maximum number of edges on a path from vto some leaf below v.
Algorithm 13.2.2 (Rectangular cladogram for trees) To compute a rectangular
cladogram , as shown in Figure 13.2b, replace step (iii) of Algorithm 13.2.1 with:
(iii’) Otherwise, set κ(v)=(−level
T(v),¯y),w h e r e ¯y is the average y-coordinate of
all children of v.v.
To draw the tree, for each edge e =(v,w ), ﬁrst deﬁne a corner c with Cartesian
coordinates (x(v),y(w)), then draw a line from vto c and from c to w.
A common variant of the rectangular cladogram is to use the average y-coordinate
of the leaves under v, as in the computation of the triangular cladogram, rather
than of the children of v.
T o construct a circular cladogram, the leaves are assigned to points around a
circle of radius level T(ρ) at equally spaced angles. Each internal node vis placed on
ac i r c l eo fr a d i u sl e v e l T(ρ)−level T(v) at an angle that is computed as the average
of all angles of the children of v.
Algorithm 13.2.3 (Circular cladogram for trees) To compute a circular cladogram,
a ss h o w ni nF i g u r e 13.2c, we deﬁne a map φ:V→R2,φ(v)=(r(v),θ(v))that
assigns polar coordinates to each node vin a postorder traversal of the tree T. Starting
at the root ρ,p r o c e e da sf o l l o w s :
(i)Process all children of vin the order prescribed by τ(v)=(v1,...,v k).
(ii)Ifvis a leaf, then set φ(v)=(level T(ρ),2πi
n), where n is the total number of
leaves and i is the number of leaves visited so far.
(iii) Otherwise, set φ(v)=(level T(ρ)−level T(v),¯θ),w h e r e ¯θis the average over
all angles θ(vi)of children viofv.

316 Drawing phylogenetic networks
To draw the tree, for each edge e =(v,w ), ﬁrst deﬁne a corner c with with polar
coordinates (r(v),θ(w)),t h e nd r a wac i r c l es e c t i o nf r o mv to c and a line from c
tow.
An interesting visualization is obtained by “inverting” the circular cladogram.This is easily done by modifying the calculation of coordinates slightly. The newalgorithm has one parameter, namely the radius Rof the inner circle Con which
the leaves are placed.Algorithm 13.2.4 (Inner circular cladogram for trees) To compute an inner circular
cladogram, as shown in Figure 13.2d, replace steps (ii) and (iii) of Algorithm 13.2.3
with:
(ii’) Ifvis a leaf, then set φ(v)=(R,2π
i
n), where n is the total number of leaves
and i is the number of leaves visited so far, and R is the chosen radius of theinner circle.
(iii’) Otherwise, set φ(v)=(R+level
T(v),¯θ),w h e r e ¯θis the average over all angles
θ(vi)of children viofv.
13.3 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic networks
T o obtain an algorithm for computing a cladogram for a rooted phylogeneticnetwork, we ﬁrst introduce the naive algorithm for drawing rooted phylogeneticnetworks and then discuss how to modify the naive algorithm appropriately.
13.3.1 The naive algorithm for rooted phylogenetic networks
In this section, we develop a naive algorithm for drawing rooted phylogenetic net-works. We will see that this can be done by applying a tree drawing algorithm to anappropriate guide tree that is derived from the given rooted phylogenetic network.
LetNbe a rooted phylogenetic network with root ρ. The ﬁrst idea that comes
t om i n di st ou s ea sg u i d et r e es o m et r e e Tthat is contained in N, that is, can
be obtained from Nby removing precisely all but one in-edge for each reticulate
node rinN(see Lemma 1.4.3). Note that we do not suppress any resulting nodes
of degree 2. All nodes of Nare contained in Tand so a set of coordinates for T
computed using one of the above algorithms can be used to draw N.W er e f e rt o
this as the naive algorithm :
Algorithm 13.3.1 (Naive algorithm for drawing rooted networks) Given a rooted
phylogenetic network N, choose some tree T embedded in N (keeping internal nodesof degree two) and use a tree-drawing algorithm to compute coordinates for all nodesof N and draw the edges of T. Then draw all missing reticulated edges of N as straightlines, using these coordinates.

317 13.3 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic networks
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 13.3 (a) The rooted phylogenetic network Nto be drawn. Removal of the edge marked ppro-
duces a phylogenetic tree T, which is depicted as a rectangular cladogram in (b). Application
of the naive algorithm using Tas a guide tree produces the rectangular cladogram shown
in (c).
The naive algorithm is a good starting point, but we cannot expect it to alwaysprovide a useful result. We now discuss some of the problems that arise and howthey can be addressed. Consider the example in Figure 13.3.T h en e t w o r kt ob e
drawn is depicted in (a). In the naive algorithm, one of the two reticulate edges
pand qleading to cis suppressed. Choosing pgives rise to the tree T,s h o w ni n
(b) as a cladogram computed using Algorithm 13.2.2.N o t et h a t Tcontains three
nodes of degree two, namely the root and the source and sink of the suppressed edge(indicated by black disks). A drawing of Nis then obtained by additionally drawing
a line to represent the suppressed edge p, as indicated in (c) by a vertical arrow.
The cladogram depicted in Figure 13.3c is not ideal for a number of reasons.
The ﬁrst problem is the apparent visual asymmetry between the two reticulateedges pand q.W h i l e pis drawn as a vertical line that cuts across the cladogram,
qis shown as an ordinary rectangular edge. In particular, it is undesirable that the
source node of one reticulation edge lies at the same level as the reticulate node,whereas the source node of the other lies at a higher level (that is, has a smaller
x-coordinate). Note, however, that such an asymmetry is desirable when drawing
a rooted phylogenetic network in the transfer view, as discussed in Section 13.6.
The second problem is that the cladogram is not a plane drawing (in which no
two edges cross or intersect). While we do not expect that all rooted phylogeneticnetworks can be represented by a plane drawing, for this particular example a planedrawing is possible, as shown in Figure 13.3a.
13.3.2 Improving the naive algorithm
Now we discuss how the two problems exhibited by the naive algorithm can besolved so as to obtain good algorithms for drawing cladograms of rooted phyloge-netic networks.

318 Drawing phylogenetic networks
c
e
d
b
ac
e
d
b
a
) b ( ) a (
Figure 13.4 (a) Drawing of guide tree Tobtained using the whole network Nto determine node levels
and (b) the improved network cladogram based on this.
The ﬁrst problem, visual asymmetry, can be addressed by two simple modiﬁca-
tions of the naive algorithm. First, in the computation of the level of a node, insteadof using the guide tree T, one should rather use the complete network N.( T h e
deﬁnition of the level of a node vin a rooted phylogenetic network Nis just as in
the case of a rooted tree, namely level
N(v)i st h en u m b e ro fe d g e si na n yl o n g e s t
path from vto any leaf of N.) With this modiﬁcation, the source nodes of pand
qwill both be placed at a higher level than their common target node. Secondly,
for visual clarity, reticulate edges should be rendered in a different style than treeedges. For example, in a rectangular cladogram, they can be shown as curves ordiagonal lines, rather than rectangular lines.
The second problem, crossing edges as illustrated in Figure 13.3c, arises because
the topological embedding of the guide tree is not well chosen. What is desirable,in general, is to produce a drawing of a rooted phylogenetic network Nin which
no tree edges intersect, and in which the number of crossings between reticulateedges and tree edges is minimized.
Because the naive algorithm uses all tree edges, it ensures that no two tree edges
intersect. The problem of minimizing the number of crossings involving reticulateedges can be addressed by determining an appropriate topological embedding forthe guide tree. T o this end, we now introduce a different choice of guide tree T,
which we call the LSA
∗tree. This tree is the LSA tree introduced in Section 6.6,
but with all internal nodes of degree two and all unlabeled leaves kept. In moredetail, the LSA
∗tree contains all tree edges and all nodes of N. Additionally, for
each reticulate node rit contains an auxiliary edge (lsa(r),r) that joins the LSA of
rtor, as illustrated in Figure 13.5.
Now, let ube some internal node of the LSA∗tree Tand let T1,..., Tk−1denote
t h es e to fa l ls u b t r e e sr o o t e da tt h ec h i l d r e no f u, as illustrated in Figure 13.6a.
Moreover, let T0and Tkbe the parts of Tthat are placed above and below uin
the current layout of the tree, respectively, as indicated in Figure 13.6a. We want

319 13.3 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic networks
e
d
bc
ar lsa(r)c
e
d
b
a
) b ( ) a (
Figure 13.5 (a) The dotted line represents the auxiliary edge from lsa(r)torthat is used in the LSA*
tree T, giving rise to the cladogram shown in (b), for example.
T0
T3T2T1
Tkρh(T ,T) 02
h(T ,T13)
h(T ,T3k )uT1
T3T1T2
Tkρh(T ,T ) 12
h(T ,T )13
h(T ,T ) 3ku
(a) Before optimization at u (b) After optimization at u
Figure 13.6 (a) For a given node u, we look at all subtrees T1,..., Tk−1rooted at the children of u,a n d
the two parts of the tree T0and Tkthat lie above and below uin the topological embedding,
respectively. Moreover, we consider the number h(Ti,Tj)of reticulate edges that link any
two such subtrees Tiand Tj, with 0≤i<j≤k. (b) The layout improvement algorithm
changes the order of the children as illustrated here.
to determine a permutation πof the children of uthat minimizes the number of
times reticulate edges cross tree edges in the drawing of the network N.T ot h i s
end, for each pair of tree parts Tiand Tj(with 0 ≤i<j≤k), let h(Ti,Tj)d e n o t e
t h en u m b e ro fr e t i c u l a t ee d g e sb e t w e e ns o m en o d ei n Tiand some node in Tj.W e
estimate the number of crossing caused by placing tree part Tiat position π(i)a n d
tree part Tjat position π(j) as the number of reticulate edges between the two
tree parts multiplied by the number of leaves that lie in the subtrees that are placedbetween the two, given by
H(i,j)=h(T
π(i),Tπ(j))×/summationdisplay
i<t<j/lscript(Tπ(t)), (13.1)

320 Drawing phylogenetic networks
where /lscript(Tπ(t)) is the number of leaves contained in the subtree Tπ(t).W ec h o o s ea
permutation πof the children of uthat minimizes the total stretch associated with
u,d e ﬁ n e da s
/summationdisplay
0≤i<j≤kH(π(i),π(j)). (13.2)
In practice, this can be done using a branch-and-bound approach.Algorithm 13.3.2 ( I m p r o v e dl a y o u to fr o o t e dn e t w o r k s ) Assume that we are given
a rooted phylogenetic network N with a guide tree T and an initial topological embed-dingτ. The embedding τcan be improved by applying the following modiﬁcation to
each internal node u in a preorder traversal of T:
(i)Determine the tree parts T
0,..., Tkassociated with u.
(ii)Determine a permutation πof the subtrees T 1,..., Tk−1that minimizes the total
stretch associated with u, given by
/summationdisplay
0≤i<j≤kH(π(i),π(j)). (13.3)
(iii) Reorder the children of u according to π.
Exercise 13.3.3 (Optimization goal) What quantity does the above algorithm opti-
mize? Prove that it does so.The approach outlined above, using the LSA* tree and a heuristic for determininga good topological embedding, already works very well in practice. However, formore complicated networks, an additional problem can occur that is not presentin the above example. Assume that the network Ncontains a node xfor which
all out-edges are reticulate edges, as shown in Figure 13.7. Then, in the LSA
∗tree
Tassociated with Nthe node xwill be an unlabeled leaf, and application of
Algorithm 13.2.2 will assign an integer y-coordinate to x. In the cladogram for N,
this will result in an unequal spacing of leaves along the base line. T o address this,after computing the initial coordinates for all leaves of T, one should reprocess the
list of leaves such that “true leaves” , namely ones that are also leaves in N,o b t a i n
adjacent integer y-coordinates, whereas the “false leaves” obtain intermediate,
fractional y-coordinates. T o see the resulting difference, compare Figures 13.7c
and e.
In Figure 13.8 we show the result obtained by applying Algorithm 13.3.2 to the
rooted phylogenetic network depicted in Figure 13.5b.
Based on the described improvements of the naive algorithm, we are now ready to
give formals descriptions of the algorithms for computing rectangular and circularcladograms of rooted phylogenetic networks. Unfortunately there does not exist a

321 13.3 Cladograms for rooted phylogenetic networks
e
d
f
bc
ar
rx
abcfdee
d
f
bc
a
) c ( ) b ( ) a (
e
d
f
c
b
ae
d
f
bc
a
) e ( ) d (
Figure 13.7 (a) A network Ncontaining two reticulations r1and r2, with auxiliary edges leading to r1
and r2shown as dashed lines. (b) None of the reticulate edges are present in the LSA* tree
T, thus Tcontains a new unlabeled leaf. A cladogram constructed without adjustment of
the spacing between true leaves is shown in (c). Modification of the spacing of leaves inthe LSA* tree (d) gives rise to a network cladogram with evenly spaced leaves (e).
e
d
bc
ae
d
bc
a
) b ( ) a (
Figure 13.8 Cladogram obtained for rooted phylogenetic network using straight (a) or curved lines
(b) to indicate reticulate edges.

322 Drawing phylogenetic networks
straightforward modiﬁcation of the Algorithm 13.2.1 that could be used to draw
triangular cladograms for rooted phylogenetic networks.
13.3.3 Rectangular cladograms
A rectangular cladogram can be computed as follows.Algorithm 13.3.4 (Rectangular cladogram for rooted networks) Arectangular
cladogram for a rooted phylogenetic network N, as shown in Figure 13.7e, is computed
as follows:
(i)Determine the LSA
∗tree T for N.
(ii)Determine a good topological embedding for T relative to N.
(iii) Assign y-coordinates to all leaves of T, as in Algorithm 13.2.1.
(iv) Adjust the y-coordinates of the leaves of T so that true leaves obtain inte-ger y-coordinates and all other leaves are assigned intermediate, fractional y-coordinates.
(v)Set the x-coordinate of each true leaf to 0.
(vi) For each internal node vof N, set κ(v)=(−level
N(v),¯y),w h e r e ¯yi st h e
y-coordinate already assigned to v,i fv is a false leaf, and ¯y is the average
y-coordinate of all children of v,o t h e r w i s e .
To draw the network, for each edge e =(v,w ), ﬁrst deﬁne a corner c with Cartesian
coordinates (x(v),y(w)). Using this, if e is a tree edge, then draw e as a rectangular
edge, otherwise draw e as a quadratic curve (or, alternatively, as a straight line fromvtow).
An example is shown in Figure 13.8.
13.3.4 Circular cladograms
As in the case of trees, we can obtain an algorithm for constructing a circularcladogram for a rooted phylogenetic network Nby modifying the algorithm for
rectangular cladograms. The goal is to assign polar coordinates φ(v)=(r(v),θ(v))
to each node vinN. Leaves are assigned to equidistant points on a circle C,r a t h e r
than along a line. The radius of Cis set to level
N(ρ) and each node vis placed on
ac i r c l eo fr a d i u sl e v e l N(v).
Algorithm 13.3.5 (Circular cladogram for rooted networks) Acircular cladogram
for a rooted phylogenetic network N, as shown in Figure 13.9b, is computed as follows:
(i)Determine the LSA∗tree T for N.
(ii)Determine a good topological embedding for T relative to N.
(iii) Assign angle coordinates θt oa l ll e a v e so fT ,a si nA l g o r i t h m 13.2.3.

323 13.4 Phylograms for rooted phylogenetic trees
ed f
c
b aed f
bc
a
) b ( ) a (
Figure 13.9 The LSA* tree Tin (a) is used to generate the circular cladogram of the rooted phylogenetic
network Nshown in (b).
(iv) Adjust the angles of the leaves of T so that true leaves obtain angles that areinteger multiples 0,1..., n−1of
2π
n, where n is the number of leaves of N, and
other leaves are assigned intermediate angles.
(v)S e tt h er a d i u sr o fe a c ht r u el e a ft o level N(ρ).
(vi) For each internal node vof N, set φ(v)=(level N(ρ)−level N(v),¯θ),w h e r e ¯θ
is the angle already assigned to v,i fvis a false leaf, and θis the average over the
angles assigned to the children of vin T, otherwise.
To draw the network, for each tree edge e =(v,w ), ﬁrst deﬁne a corner c with with
polar coordinates (r(v),θ(w)), then draw a circle section from vto c and a line from
ct ow. Draw all reticulate edges as straight lines.
An example is shown in Figure 13.9.
13.4 Phylograms for rooted phylogenetic trees
In the context of trees, a phylogram is a representation of a rooted phylogenetic
tree in which the edges are drawn to scale to represent some form of evolutionarydistance along edges, such as the number of mutations thought to have takenplace, or the distances assigned by an algorithm such as neighbor-joining, seeSection 3.14.
LetTbe a rooted phylogenetic tree on a taxon set Xand, as usual, we assume
that all edges of Tare directed away from the root ρ. We assume that each edge e
has been given a weight orlength ω(e)≥0. Such weights are represented explicitly
in the drawings: in a rectangular phylogram, the horizontal part of a rectangularedge is scaled to represent the corresponding weight, whereas in a circular diagram,the whole edge is scaled to represent the corresponding weight.
T o compute a rectangular phylogram for T,a si nS e c t i o n13.2 we make use of a
topological embedding τofTto assign y-coordinates to all nodes of Tand then
use a simple preorder traversal to assign x-coordinates to all nodes:

324 Drawing phylogenetic networks
Algorithm 13.4.1 (Rectangular phylogram for trees) Arectangular phylogram for
a phylogenetic tree T with edge weighting ω, as shown in Figure 13.2e, is computed as
follows:
(i)In a postorder traversal, assign a y-coordinate to each node vas follows: if vis a
leaf, then set y (v)=i, where i is the number of leaves visited so far, and otherwise
set y (v)equal to the average y-coordinate of all children of v.
(ii)Set x (ρ)=0and then, in a preorder traversal, for each edge e =(v,v i),s e tt h e
x-coordinate of vito x(vi)=x(v)+ω(e).
Draw the tree as in Algorithm 13.2.2.
Polar coordinates for a circular phylogram can be computed by ﬁrst assigning anangle to each node, as described in Algorithm 13.2.3, and then setting the radius
of each node vto the path distance from the root ρtov.
Algorithm 13.4.2 (Circular phylogram for trees) Acircular phylogram for a phy-
logenetic tree T with edge weighting ωis computed as follows:
(i)In a postorder traversal, assign an angle coordinate θ(v)to each node vas follows:
ifvis the i-th leaf to be visited, then set θ(v)=2π
i
n, where n is the total
number of leaves, otherwise set θ(v)equal to the average angle assigned to all
children of v.
(ii)Set r (ρ)=0and then, in a preorder traversal, for each edge e =(v,v i)set the
radius coordinate of vito r(vi)=r(v)+ω(e).
Draw the edges as in Algorithm 13.2.3.
13.5 Phylograms for rooted phylogenetic networks
In this section, we discuss how to draw phylograms for rooted phylogenetic net-works. Again, the starting point is the naive algorithm described in Section 13.3.1
and we obtain useful algorithms by solving the problems that the naive approachexhibits.
13.5.1 Rectangular phylograms
LetNb ear o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r kw i t he d g ew e i g h t s ω. We can obtain a
rectangular phylogram for Nby applying Algorithm 13.3.1 to the LSA∗tree Tof
N. Just as in the case of cladograms, a better drawing can be obtained by modifying
the vertical spacing of leaves of Tso that true leaves of Tobtain consecutive
integer y-coordinates, whereas false leaves (ones that are leaves in Tbut not in N)
obtain intermediate, fractional y-coordinates. Also, the topological embedding of

325 13.5 Phylograms for rooted phylogenetic networks
f
e
d
bc
afe d
bc
afed
bc
a
) c ( ) b ( ) a (
Figure 13.10 A rooted phylogenetic network shown as (a) a rectangular phylogram, (b) a circular phylo-
gram and (c) a radial diagram. Whereas the root node in (b) is easily identified as the nodeat which all tree edges would meet, if extended, in (c) the position of the root does notdistinguish it from other nodes.
Tshould be chosen so as to minimize the number of crossings involving reticulate
edges in N.
As in the case of cladograms, for visual clarity, we want the source node vof any
reticulate edge e=(v,v i) to have a strictly smaller x-coordinate than the target
nodevi. T o ensure this, for any such viwe set x(vi)=xmax+/Delta1,w h e r e xmaxis
the largest x-coordinate of any parent node of viand/Delta1> 0 is a user speciﬁed
offset parameter that controls how far reticulate nodes “stick out” . We compute the
x-coordinates in a modiﬁed preorder traversal of T, in which we only process a
nodevionce all its parents in Nhave been processed.
Algorithm 13.5.1 (Rectangular phylogram for networks) Arectangular phylo-
gram for a rooted phylogenetic network N, as shown in Figure 13.10ai sc o m p u t e da s
follows:
(i)Determine the LSA∗tree T for N.
(ii)Determine a good topological embedding for T relative to N.
(iii) Assign and adjust the y-coordinates of all leaves of T, as in Algorithm 13.3.4.
(iv) Set x (ρ)=0and then proceed in a preorder traversal:
(a)If the visited node vihas precisely one in-edge e =(v,v i)in N, then set
x(vi)=x(v)+ω(e).
(b)Ifvihas more than one parent in N and they have all been assigned x-
coordinates, set x (vi)=xmax+/Delta1, where x maxis the largest x-coordinate of
any parent node of viand/Delta1> 0is the speciﬁed offset parameter.
(c)Ifvihas more than one parent in N and at least one of the parents has not
yet been assigned coordinates, then place viback into the queue of nodes that
are waiting to be processed.
Draw the edges as in Algorithm 13.3.4.

326 Drawing phylogenetic networks
(a) Rectangular cladogram (b) Circular cladogram
(c) Rectangular phylogram (d) Circular phylogram
Figure 13.11Four different representations of a phylogenetic network computed for 25 plants, based on
[161 ]. The first two diagrams are cladograms and the other two are phylograms.
13.5.2 Circular phylograms
A simple modiﬁcation of the previous algorithm can be used to compute a circularphylogram for a rooted phylogenetic network N. Again, a user-deﬁned parameter
/Delta1governs how much reticulate nodes are to rise above the source nodes of their
incoming edges.Algorithm 13.5.2 (Circular phylogram for networks) Acircular phylogram for a
rooted phylogenetic network N, as shown in Figure 13.10b, is computed as follows:
(i)Determine the LSA
∗tree T for N.
(ii)Determine a good topological embedding for T relative to N.
(iii) Assign and adjust the angle coordinates of all leaves of T, as in Algorithm 13.3.5.
(iv) Set r (ρ)=0and then proceed in a preorder traversal: If vihas precisely one
in-edge e =(v,v i)in N, then set r (vi)=r(v)+ω(e).O t h e r w i s e ,w h e na l l

327 13.6 Drawing rooted phylogenetic networks with transfer edges
parents of viin N have been assigned x-coordinates, set r (vi)=rmax+/Delta1,
where r maxis the largest radius coordinate of any parent node of viand/Delta1> 0is
the speciﬁed offset parameter.
Draw the edges as in Algorithm 13.3.5.
13.5.3 Examples
The four different drawings of rooted phylogenetic networks – rectangular andcircular cladogram, and rectangular and circular phylogram – are illustrated inFigure 13.11, which shows a cluster network based on all clusters that appear in
more than 20% of 59 gene trees computed for 25 plants [ 161].
13.6 Drawing rooted phylogenetic networks with transfer edges
The drawing algorithms for rooted phylogenetic networks described so far in thischapter depict alledges entering a particular reticulate node explicitly as reticulate
edges. As discussed in Section 4.4.6,w ec a l lt h i st y p eo fi l l u s t r a t i o nacombining
view of a rooted phylogenetic network.
Now, suppose that a given rooted phylogenetic network Nis to be interpreted as a
species tree that has been augmented by some additional transfer edges representing
putative horizontal gene transfer events, for example. Or, suppose we have a rootedphylogenetic tree describing the evolution of spoken languages, together with a setof transfer edges (also called contact edges in this context) that represent signiﬁcant
periods of contact between different languages. Then a combining view is notappropriate and what is required is a transfer view . We show examples of both
kinds of views in Figure 13.12.
T o compute a transfer view for a rooted phylogenetic network N, we need some
additional input information. For each reticulate node vw er e q u i r et h a te x a c t l yo n e
i n - e d g eh a sb e e nc h o s e na st h et r e ee d g el e a d i n gt o v. Under these circumstances,
the network Ncan be decomposed into two parts:
(i) A rooted phylogenetic tree T(N)t h a tc o n t a i n sa l ln o d e so f N, and whose edge
set consists of all tree edges of Nand exactly one chosen in-edge for each
reticulate node.
(ii) The set of all transfer edges of Nconsisting of all reticulate edges of Nthat
were not chosen as tree edges.
We can modify the algorithms described in this chapter to produce transfer views.Instead of using the LSA* tree as a guide tree, we use the tree T(N). When draw-
ing cladograms, there is another minor modiﬁcation that must be made to thealgorithms: the level of a node vthat is the source of a transfer edge ( v,v
i)

328 Drawing phylogenetic networks
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
ma
b
c
l
m
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
(a) Tree T1 (b) Tree T2
a
b
c
def
gi
hj
kl
ma
b
c
def
gi
hk
jl
ma
b
c
def
gh
il
m
j
k
(c) Combining view (d) First transfer view (e) Second transfer view
Figure 13.12 In (a) and (b) we show two slightly different rooted phylogenetic trees on X={a,..., m}.
In (c) we display a rooted phylogenetic network that contains both trees and is drawn in acombining view. In (d) we show a transfer view of the same network, in which the reticulateedge coming from the lineage to chas been chosen as a tree edge, whereas in (e) we show
the result of choosing the other reticulate edge as a tree edge.
should be set to the level to the target node of the edge, vi, if possible. Option-
ally, the transfer edges can be drawn as arrows to indicate the direction of thetransfer.Exercise 13.6.1 (Combining view and transfer view in Dendroscope) Write down
the Newick strings for the three networks shown in Figure 13.12. Enter them into the
Dendroscope program (see Section 14.4) and compare the resulting visualizations.
13.7 Radial diagrams for unrooted trees
Another popular tree-drawing method is the radial diagram, which is oftenemployed when the root of a phylogenetic tree is unknown, unclear or of littlei n t e r e s t .I ti sc o m p u t e db yﬁ r s ta s s i g n i n ga n g l e st on o d e s ,a si nA l g o r i t h m 13.4.2,
and then translating nodes in the direction of their angles in a preorder traversal.Although the algorithm that we describe processes the tree from the root down,the resulting drawing is independent of the choice of root (up to congruence) andthus the result of this algorithm is considered a diagram, rather than a phylogram.This algorithm is known as the equal angle algorithm [174 ].

329 13.8 Radial diagrams for split networks
Algorithm 13.7.1 (Radial diagram for trees) Aradial diagram for a phylogenetic
tree T, as shown in Figure 13.2f, is computed as follows:
(i)In a postorder traversal, assign an angle θ(v)to each node vas follows: if vis
the i-th leaf to be visited, then set θ(v)=2πi
n, where n is the total number of
leaves, otherwise set θ(v)equal to the average angle assigned to all children of v.
(ii)Set(x(ρ),y(ρ))=(0,0)and then, in a preorder traversal, for each edge e =
(v,v i), compute the coordinates of viby translating the point (x(v),y(v))
through a distance of ω(e)in the direction of θ(vi).
(iii) Draw every edge (v,w )as a straight line from vtow.
It is possible to adapt this algorithm to the task of drawing radial diagrams forrooted phylogenetic networks, see Figure 13.10c. However, the position of the root
is particularly important for a rooted phylogenetic network and so this “unrooted”visualization is of limited use in practice. In the following section, we discuss theproblem of drawing split networks, which are unrooted and are usually drawn in aradial fashion.
13.8 Radial diagrams for split networks
In Chapter 5, we discuss how to construct a split network from a set of splits. In
this section, we look at the problem of assigning coordinates to the nodes of a splitnetwork.
LetSb eas e to fs p l i t so nat a x o ns e t X,a n dl e t ω:S→
Rbe a weighting of the
splits. Recall from Chapter 5that a split network N=(V,E,σ,λ ) representing S
i sg i v e nb yas p l i tg r a p h( G=(V,E),σ :E→S)a n dan o d el a b e l i n g λ:X→V,
with the property that for any split S=A|B∈Sthe deletion of every edge ewith
σ(e)=Sproduces a graph consisting of precisely two connected components, one
containing λ(A) and the other containing λ(B).
Of course, if Sis compatible, then the canonical split network Nassociated
withSis a phylogenetic tree and we can obtain a radial phylogram using Algo-
rithm 13.7.1.O t h e r w i s e ,i f Scontains a split Sthat is incompatible with k>0
other splits, then Swill be represented by at least kedges. For visual clarity, we
want these edges to be represented by parallel lines of length ω(S), as speciﬁed in
the following deﬁnition.Deﬁnition 13.8.1 (Embedding of a split network) LetSbe a set of splits on Xwith
weights ω.A n embedding of a split network N =(V,E,σ,λ )forSis given by a
mapκ:V→
R2,κ(v)=(x(v),y(v))that has the following property:
/squaresolidF o ra n yt w oe d g e se =(v,v i)∈Ea n d e/prime=(v/prime,v/prime
i)∈E representing the same split
S∈S, that is with σ(e)=σ(e/prime)=S, we have that the line segments (κ(v),κ(vi))
and (κ(v/prime),κ(v/prime
i))are parallel and have the same length ω(S).

330 Drawing phylogenetic networks
(a) (b)
Figure 13.13 (a) A radial diagram representation of a split network computed for 25plants, based on
[161 ]. Replacing all split weights by uniform weights leads to the diagram shown in (b).
T o ensure that all edges representing a given split are drawn in parallel, we assignan angle θ(S) to every split S∈Sand use this to determine the direction of all
edges representing S. One way to assign such angles is to do so randomly, but
this, of course, may lead to an overly complicated drawing with many unnecessaryedge crossings. In practice, a good way to proceed is to ﬁrst greedily select alarge subset of splits S
/prime⊆Sthat is circular (as deﬁned in Chapter 5)a n dt h e nt o
setθ(S)=2π
n(p+q)
2=π(p+q)
nfor all S={xp,...,xq}
X−{xp,...,xq}∈S/prime.T h i si sd o n eu n d e rt h e
assumption, without loss of generality, that the circularity of S/primeis with respect to
the ordering ( x1,..., xn). All other splits are assigned random angles.
Now, given a split network Nand an assignment of weights ω, an embedding of
a split network Ncan be computed by the following algorithm:
Algorithm 13.8.2 (Radial diagram for split networks) LetSbe a set of splits on X
with weighting ω:S→R≥0.Aradial diagram for a split network N =(V,E,σ,λ )
forSis computed as follows:
(i)Assign an angle θto each split S ∈S.
(ii)Choose an arbitrary starting node ρand set (x(ρ)),y(ρ))=(0,0).
(iii) Starting at ρ,p e r f o r map r e o r d e rt r a v e r s a lo fNa sf o l l o w s :O ne n t e r i n gan o d e
vivia an edge e =(v,v i), compute the coordinates of viby translating the point
(x(v),y(v))through a distance of ω(e)in the direction of θ(σ(e)). Then, process
all nodes u adjacent to vithat have not yet been processed and for whom the split
σ(f),w i t h f =(vi,u), does not occur as the split of any edge on the current
traversal path from ρtovi.
(iv) Draw every edge (v,w )as a straight line from vtow.
An example is shown in Figure 13.13. Note that if the input set of splits Sis circular
and the split network was computed using the circular network algorithm, then

331 13.8 Radial diagrams for split networks
the assignment of coordinates computed by this algorithm will produce a planenetwork.
Chapter notes
A summary of different strategies for drawing phylogenetic tree can be found in[77]. The algorithms described there are extended to unrooted phylogenetic net-
works in [ 62] and to rooted phylogenetic networks in [ 124]. Some strategies for
improving the drawing of a split network can be found in [ 82]. The presented algo-
rithms for drawing rooted and unrooted phylogenetic networks are implementedin the programs Dendroscope [ 120]a n dS p l i t s T r e e[ 125], respectively.

14
Software
In this chapter, we give an overview of the software available for computing phylo-genetic networks. We ﬁrst discuss some of the currently most widely used programsin slightly more detail and then brieﬂy summarize many of the others.
14.1 SplitsTree
SplitsTree (or, more precisely, SplitsTree4) is an interactive tool for computing
unrooted phylogenetic networks from sequences, distances, trees or splits [ 122,
125]. The program provides a wide range of methods for computing distances froma multiple sequence alignment of nucleotide sequences, amino acid sequences andsome other types of sequences. Methods for computing splits or a network fromdifferent types of data include: split decomposition, neighbor-net, median network,median-joining, minimum spanning network, consensus split network, Z-closuresuper network, the convex hull algorithm and the circular network algorithm.
The program is designed around a processing pipeline that determines the order
in which data is processed, namely: sequences →distances →trees→splits→
network. Processing can start anywhere in this chain and can also skip some ofthe intermediate steps. The processing pipeline is illustrated in Figure 14.1.T h e
program uses the Nexus ﬁle format [ 170] to represent the different blocks data, but
also supports import and export in several other ﬁle formats.
The program is designed as an interative tool for exploring a dataset, providing
different ﬁlters for including or excluding different taxa, trees or splits. Usinga plugin concept that makes it easy to add new algorithms to the program, itcontains many other methods in addition to those mentioned in Figure 14.1.
The aim of the ﬁrst published version of SplitsTree [ 122]w a st op r o v i d ea n
implementation of the split decomposition and supporting methods. In 2006, acompletely new version of the program was published [ 125], which is written in
Java and provides a much wider range of methods, as listed above. Installers for allthree major operating systems (Microsoft
R/circlecopyrtWindowsR/circlecopyrt,M a c O SR/circlecopyrtand UnixR/circlecopyrt)c a n
332

333 14.2 Network
Figure 14.1 Some of the main features of the SplitsTree processing pipeline. The input data can be
aligned sequences, distances, a set of trees, a set of splits or a network. Data is processedfrom top-left to bottom-right. Arrows between different types of data are labeled by thetypes of methods that can be applied. For example, the neighbor-net method can be usedto compute a set of splits from distances. SplitsTree currently does not contain any methodfor computing one or more trees directly from sequences, but it is possible to call anexternal program to do this, for example, the program DNAPars [ 75] to compute a set of
most-parsimonious trees.
be downloaded from: http://www.splitstree.org. All split networks illustrated in
this book were computed using SplitsTree, see, in particular, Figures 4.3and 11.3.
14.2 Network
Network is an interactive program for computing unrooted phylogenetic networks
from sequence data. It provides implementations of the median network, thereduced median network, and the median-joining algorithm. For an example of areduced median network constructed by this program, see Figure 4.4.T h ep r o g r a m
supports the following types of input: DNA sequences, amino-acid sequences, STR(short tandem repeat) or microsatellite data, and language/linguistic or manuscriptdata. Network uses its own ﬁle format.

334 Software
The program provides a number of methods for producing visually appealing
and clearer networks, including a “star contraction” preprocessing step that can beused to contract parts of a network to a simpliﬁed skeleton tree (see Figure 9.12). The
Network software only runs under the Microsoft
R/circlecopyrtWindowsR/circlecopyrtoperating system.
It can be downloaded from: http://www.ﬂuxus-engineering.com .
14.3 TCS
TCS is a program for computing an unrooted phylogenetic network from a multi-
ple sequence alignment or from a distance matrix [ 52]. The program provides an
implementation of the statistical parsimony method [ 233]. In this approach, a net-
work is constructed by sequentially connecting taxa in the order of their increasingcharacter-state differences until the “probability of parsimony” drops below 95%(by default), as deﬁned in [ 233], Equations 6–8.
The program uses a restricted version of the Nexus format. The program is
written in Java and thus runs under all three major operating systems. The softwareis available from: http://darwin.uvigo.es/software/tcs.html .
14.4 Dendroscope
The program Dendroscope was originally developed as an interactive tool for draw-
ing phylogenetic trees [ 130], in particular, large trees containing up to 1 million
nodes. In version 2, the program has been extended so as to allow the computationand visualization of rooted phylogenetic networks,a sw e l l[ 120].
The input to Dendroscope is a ﬁle containing one or more phylogenetic trees or
rooted phylogenetic networks, each described in the Newick or extended-Newickformat, as discussed in Sections 3.18 and 4.5, respectively. The program allows the
user to scroll through the ﬁle and to look at each of the trees or networks, usingone of the eight different visualizations offered by the program. The visualizationsare based on the algorithms described in Chapter 13.E a c ht r e eo rn e t w o r kc a n
be rerooted, pruned, colored or edited in a number of different ways. Most of thedrawings of rooted phylogenetic networks shown in this book were produced usingDendroscope.
In addition to the ability to visualize rooted phylogenetic networks, Dendroscope
also provides a number options for computing a rooted phylogenetic network froma collection of input trees, these include the computation of a cluster network, agalled network or a level- knetwork, as described in Sections 8.1, 8.4and 8.5,
respectively.

335 14.5 Other programs
T o handle the case when the input trees do not all contain exactly the same set
of taxaX, the program contains an implementation of the Z-closure algorithm (as
described in Section 11.2). This algorithm determines all splits represented by the
input trees and repeatedly applies the Z-closure rule to grow all partial splits to full
splits on X.
Using this, Dendroscope allows one to compute a rooted phylogenetic network
from a set of trees, even when the trees contain different sets of taxa. Moreover, theprogram provides a computation of (rooted versions of) the strict consensus andmajority consensus trees in this case.
Additionally, Dendroscope provides implementations of two different methods
of computing a rooted phylogenetic network to obtain a single-labeled represen-tation of a multi-labeled tree, as described in Section 11.7. An upcoming version
of Dendroscope will contain an implementation of an algorithm for computing allhybridization networks for two trees (see Section 11.5).
Dendroscope is implemented in Java and installers for all three major operating
systems are available from: http://www.dendroscope.org.
14.5 Other programs
Above, we describe some of the currently most widely used tools for computingphylogenetic networks. There are more than 40 software packages available forperforming calculations in the context of phylogenetic networks. Many of thesecan be characterized as “proof-of-concept” implementations that have not (yet)been engineered so as to provide a robust and user-friendly tool that can be usedby biologists in the lab. Here we give a short overview over some of the otherprograms and packages, based on a database maintained by Philippe Gambette at:http://www.atgc-montpellier.fr/phylnet/programs .
Arlequin is a widely used program for population genetics data analysis [ 71]. It
also provides an implementation of the minimum spanning network, as discussedin Section 9.6.1.
Beagle is a small collection of programs for analyzing the minimum number of
recombinations required for a multiple alignment of binary sequences [ 169].
Bio-PhyloNetwork is a BioPerl package that implements a number of algorithms
on rooted phylogenetic networks, in particular different methods for comparingthem [ 42].
CombineTrees combines a set of maximum parsimony trees into a single rooted
phylogenetic network using a method called UMP [45].
EEEP (“efﬁcient evaluation of edit paths”) aims at reconciling a rooted reference
tree and an unrooted test tree by performing a minimum number of SPR operations

336 Software
on the reference tree [ 18]. As discussed in Section 11.5, SPR moves are closely related
to horizontal transfer events and so the reconciliation path output by the programcorresponds to a set of horizontal gene transfers between organisms in the referencetree.
GalledTree is a commandline program that determines whether a given multiple
alignment of binary sequences can be represented by a galled tree [ 98].
HybridInterleave is a Java program that calculates the minimum number of retic-
ulations required by a hybridization network to represent two rooted phylogenetictrees [ 24], as discussed in Section 11.5.
LEVEL2 is a Java program for constructing a level-2 phylogenetic network for a
set of rooted triples [133 ].
MARLON (“minimum amount of reticulation level one network”) attempts to
compute a level-1 phylogenetic network, with the minimum number of reticulatenodes, from a set of rooted triples [ 134], see Section 12.2.
MY-CLOSURE computes a supernetwork from a set of partial phylogenetic trees
using so-called closure operations [92].
Notung provides a framework for incorporating duplication/loss parsimony into
phylogenetic tasks, such as reconciling a gene tree with a species tree or estimatingupper and lower bounds on the time of duplication [ 49].
PADRE is a Java package for the computation and graphical representation of
rooted phylogenetic networks obtained from one or more multi-labeled trees [ 167],
see Section 11.7.
PEGAS (“population and evolutionary genetics analysis system”) is an R package
for the analysis of population genetics data [ 193]. It provides functions for standard
population genetic methods and for plotting haplotype networks.
PhyloNet is a suite of tools for computing and analyzing reticulate evolutionary
relationships [234]. It includes tools for inferring horizontal gene transfers, for
detecting recombination breakpoints in a multiple sequence alignment and forcomparing rooted phylogenetic networks.
QNet is a Java program that implements the quartet-net method [ 91], see
Section 12.3.
Recodon is a population genetics simulator that generates samples of nucleotide
and codon sequences from populations with recombination, migration and growth,after generating their genealogy (a rooted phylogenetic network) under the coales-cent framework [ 4].
RecPars performs a parsimony analysis of a set of DNA sequences [ 106]. It
tries to ﬁnd the best phylogenies for different segments of the sequences, therebypostulating a recombination event between these segments.
Serial NetEvolve is a simulator that evolves serially sampled sequences along a
randomly generated rooted phylogenetic tree or network [ 35].

337 14.5 Other programs
SHRUB constructs a minimum recombination network that represents a multi-
ple alignment of binary sequences under the inﬁnite sites assumption [ 225].
Sliding MinPD reconstructs phylogenetic networks of serially sampled sequences
by combining minimum pairwise distance measures with automated recombina-tion detection based on a sliding window approach [ 36].
Spectronet provides implementations of split-based methods such as the
(reduced) median network and the so-called pruned-median network [ 116].
T-Rex allows one to compute a tree with short-cut edges for a given distance
matrix [171], see Section 10.5.
Treemapper is a program for reconciling host and parasite trees (or also gene
trees and species trees) using the concept of a jungle [48].

Glossary
Abstract phylogenetic network A phylogenetic network used to visualize incompatiblities in a
dataset, such as a split network or a haploytpe network, 71
Adams consensus tree A rooted consensus tree in which the maximal clusters are intersections
of maximal clusters of the input trees, 65
Aho algorithm Computes the rooted phylogenetic tree encoded by a set of rooted triples, if it
exists, 301
Ancestral recombination graph Graph describing the history of a set of sequences under the
coalescent-with-recombination model, 236
Bayesian tree inference Computes a posterior probability distribution of phylogenetic trees for
a multiple sequence alignment, under a given model of evolution and prior distribution oftrees, 45
Bicombination A node in a rooted phylogenetic network of indegree two, 140
Biconnected component A maximal subgraph that is induced by a set of edges and cannot be
disconnected by deleting a single node, 6
Bifurcation A node in a rooted phylogenetic tree or network of outdegree two, 140
BME tree An unrooted phylogenetic tree with balanced edge lengths and minimum tree
length, 56
Buneman graph A canonically deﬁned split network, 89
Circular splits A set of splits that can be represented by an outer-labeled planar split
network, 102
Clade A monophyletic group, 11
Cladogram A drawing of a rooted phylogenetic tree or network aimed at clearly representing
its topology, that is, showing how clusters are nested within each other, and in which edgelengths do not have an interpretation, 312
Cluster Ap r o p e rs u b s e to fas e to ft a x a ,1 2 8
Cluster network A rooted phylogenetic network that provides a hardwired representation of a
set of (not necessarily compatible) clusters, 134
Combining view Drawing of a rooted phylogenetic network in which reticulate edges are shown
as combining edges, 81
Compatibility Two splits, characters or clusters, are compatible, if they both can occur together
in some phylogenetic tree, 90
338

339 Glossary
Consensus split network A split network used to represent all splits that occur in a given
proportion of a set of input trees, 266
DAG A directed graph that is free of directed cycles, 8
Decomposition property A phylogenetic network is decomposable if there is a bijection between
its biconnected components and the connected components of the incompatibility graph ofthe represented data, 151
Dendroscope A computer program for rooted phylogenetic trees and networks, 334
Directed graph A set of nodes and a set of directed edges between nodes, 4
Displayed trees distance Distance based on the number of represented trees by which two
rooted phylogenetic networks differ, 158
Distance matrix A symmetric non-negative function that satisﬁes the triangle inequality, 50
Distance-based method Computes a phylogenetic tree or network from a distance matrix, 50
DLT event A gene duplication, loss or horizontal transfer event, 289
DLT scenario A mapping of a gene tree on to a species tree using gene duplications, losses and
transfers, 294
Edit distance The minimum number of edit operations (such as insertions, deletions and
replacements) required to transform one sequence into another, 14
Explicit phylogenetic network A phylogenetic network used to represent a putative evolution-
ary history involving reticulate events, such as a hybridization network, 71
FastME method A heuristic for computing a BME tree from distances, 59
Galled network A rooted phylogenetic network in which each reticulation has a tree cycle, 162
Galled tree A rooted phylogenetic network in which each non-trivial biconnected component
properly contains exactly one reticulate node, 156
Gene conversion The conversion of one allele to another due to base mismatch repair during
recombination, x
Haplotype network An unrooted phylogenetic network used to show relationships between
closely related sequences, 75
Hardwired cluster distance Distance based on the number of hardwired clusters by which two
rooted phylogenetic networks differ, 173
Hardwired network A rooted phylogenetic network interpreted in the hardwired sense in which
all reticulate edges are considered to be on, 148
Hasse diagram A drawing of a partially ordered set, organized in layers from top to bottom, 133
Homologous sequences A set of biomolecular sequences that have evolved from a common
ancestral sequence, 13
Horiztonal gene transfer The transfer of genes from one organism to another, as opposed to
the more usual vertical transfer in which an organism obtains its genes from its parents orparent, ix
Hybridization The production of offspring from parents of different lineages, x
Hybridization network A rooted phylogenetic network used to explain the incongruence of
two gene trees in terms of hybridization events, 275
Incompatibility graph A graph whose nodes represent splits, or clusters, and whose edges
represent pairs of incompatible splits, or clusters, respectively, 91

340 Glossary
Level-k network A bicombining, rooted phylogenetic network in which each biconnected com-
ponent contains at most kreticulations, 160
Lowest stable ancestor The last node on all paths from the root to a given node, 142
LSA consensus tree A consensus tree that is obtained as the LSA tree of the cluster network of
a collection of rooted phylogenetic trees, 143
Majority consensus tree A phylogenetic tree that represents the set of all splits present in more
than half of all members of a collection of unrooted phylogenetic trees, 57
Maximum likelihood estimation Computes the phylogenetic tree that maximizes the likelihood
of generating a given multiple sequence alignment under a given model of evolution, 64
Maximum parsimony method Computes a phylogenetic tree that provides the most parsimo-
nious explanation of the differences in a multiple sequence alignment, 33
Median network A canonical split network that represents a multiple alignment of binary
sequences, 220
Median-joining network An unrooted phylogenetic network that represents a multiple
sequence alignment, 230
Molecular clock The molecular clock hypothesis states that the mutation rate is constant over
all sites of sequences and over all branches of a phylogenetic tree, 52
Monophyletic group A group that contains all (and only) the descendants of a common ancestor
and the ancestor itself, 11
Multi-labeled tree A phylogenetic tree in which taxa appear more than once, 287
Multicombination A node in a rooted phylogenetic network of indegree three or more, 139
Multifurcation A node in a rooted phylogenetic tree or network of outdegree three or more,
140
Multiple sequence alignment A display of sequences, one per row, in which gaps have been
inserted so that putatively homologous positions in the sequences are placed in the samecolumn, 20
Neighbor-joining method An agglomerative algorithm for computing unrooted phylogenetic
trees from distances, 54
Neighbor-net method An algorithm that constructs a set of circular splits for a distance matrix,
254
Nested-labels distance Distance based on the number of nested labels by which two rooted
phylogenetic networks differ, 180
Network software A computer program for calculating median networks and median-joining
networks, 333
Parsimony splits An algorithm for computing a set of weakly compatible splits for a given
multiple sequence alignment, 218
Path-multiplicity distance Distance for rooted phylogenetic networks that is based on counting
the number of different paths from internal nodes to leaves, 179
Phylogenetic network Any graph that is used to represent evolutionary relationships (either
abstractly or explicitly) between taxa, 69
Phylogenetic tree A tree aimed at representing evolutionary relationships between the taxa that
label its leaves, 25

341 Glossary
Phylogram A drawing of a rooted phylogenetic tree or network in which edges are drawn to
scale to represent some form of evolutionary distance, 323
Reassortment The swapping of genetic material between viruses that have co-infected a host
cell, x
Reassortment network A rooted phylogenetic network that uses reassortment events in the
description of the evolutionary history of viruses, 80
Recombination The exchange of genes between chromosomes, usually of homologous genes
between homologous chromosomes, x
Recombination network A rooted phylogenetic network in which reticulate nodes represent
putative recombination events, 233
Reticulate evolution Evolution involving events such as hybridization, horizontal gene transfer,
reassortment or recombination, ix
Reticulation A node in a rooted phylogenetic network that has more than one in-edge,
139
Rooted network alignment A mapping between similar nodes of two rooted phylogenetic net-
works, 181
Rooted phylogenetic network Any rooted graph that represents evolutionary relationships
(either abstractly or explicitly) between taxa, 76
Rooted phylogenetic tree A phylogenetic tree for which a node has been speciﬁed as root, thus
giving a direction of time to the tree, 26
Rooted triple A bifurcating, rooted phylogenetic tree on three taxa, 300
Sequence-based method Any method that computes a phylogenetic tree (or network) from a
multiple sequence alignment, 33
Softwired cluster distance Distance based on the number of softwired clusters by which two
rooted phylogenetic networks differ, 174
Softwired network A rooted phylogenetic network interpreted in the softwired sense in which
reticulate edges can be switched onoroff, 148
Split A bipartition of a set of taxa, for example, induced by an edge of an unrooted phylogenetic
tree, 87
Split decomposition An algorithm for computing a set of weakly compatible splits for a given
distance matrix, 111
Split encoding The set of all splits associated with an unrooted phylogenetic tree, 89
Split graph The underlying graph of a split network, 94
Split network A network representing a set of splits in which taxa appear as node labels and
splits are represented by arrays of parallel edges, 96
SplitsTree A computer program for computing split networks, 332
Strict consensus tree A consensus tree that is obtained from the set of splits that are present in
all input trees, 63
Subnetwork distance Distance based on the number of isomorphic subnetworks by which two
rooted phylogenetic networks differ, 178
Substitution matrix Assigns a score to the substitution of one character state by another one in
an alignment, 15

342 Glossary
Super network A phylogenetic network constructed from phylogenetic trees on overlapping
taxon sets, 271
Taxon set A set of taxonomic units or taxa that represent groups of organisms, 11
TCS A computer program for calculating an unrooted phylogenetic network for sequences, 334
Transfer view Drawing of a rooted phylogenetic network that uses transfer edges, 81
Tree A connected graph with no (undirected) cycles, 7
Tree-child property Every internal node in a rooted phylogenetic network has a child that is a
tree node, 164
Tree-sibling property Every reticulate node in a rooted phylogenetic network has a sibling that
is a tree node, 166
Tripartition distance Distance based on the number of tripartions by which two rooted phylo-
genetic networks differ, 175
Undirected graph A set of nodes and a set of undirected edges between nodes, 3
Unrooted phylogenetic network Any unrooted graph that is used to (abstractly) represent evo-
lutionary relationships between taxa, 71
Unrooted phylogenetic tree A phylogenetic tree for which a root has not been speciﬁed and
thus the direction of time is undeﬁned, 25
UPGMA A distance-based method that computes a rooted phylogenetic tree in which all leaves
have the same distance from the root, 52
Weak compatibility Three splits are weakly compatible, if they fulﬁll a certain relaxation of the
compatibility requirement for two splits, 106

References
[1] E. N. Adams III. Consensus techniques and the comparison of phylogenetic trees.
Systematic Zoology , 21(4):390–397, 1972.
[2] E. N. Adams III. N-trees as nesttings: complexity, similarity, and consensus. Journal of
Classiﬁcation, 3:299–317, 1986.
[ 3 ] A .V .A h o ,Y .S a g i v ,T .G .S z y m a n s k i ,a n dJ .D .U l l m a n .I n f e r r i n gat r e ef r o ml o w e s tc o m m o n
ancestors with an application to the optimization of relational expressions. SIAM Journal
on Computing, 10(3):405–421, 1981.
[4] M. Arenas and D. Posada. Recodon: coalescent simulation of coding DNA sequences with
recombination, migration and demography. BMC Bioinformatics, 8:458, 2007.
[5] S. C. Ayling and T. A. Brown. Novel methodology for construction and pruning of
quasi-median networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 9:115, 2008.
[6] H. -J. Bandelt. Generating median graphs from boolean matrices. In Y. Dodge, ed.,
L1-Statistical Analysis , pp. 305–309. North-Holland, 1992.
[7] H. -J. Bandelt. Phylogenetic networks. Verhandl. Naturwiss. Vereins Hamburg (NF) , 34:51–
71, 1994.
[8] H. -J. Bandelt and A. Dress. A relational approach to split decomposition. In O. Opitz,
B. Lausen, and R. Klar, eds., Information and Classiﬁcation , pp. 123–131. Springer,
1993.
[9] H. -J. Bandelt and A. W. M. Dress. A canonical decomposition theory for metrics on a
ﬁnite set. Advances in Mathematics , 92:47–105, 1992.
[10] H. -J. Bandelt, P . Forster, and A. R ¨ohl. Median-joining networks for inferring intraspeciﬁc
phylogenies. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 16:37–48, 1999.
[11] H. J. Bandelt, P . Forster, B. C. Sykes, and M. B. Richards. Mitochondrial portraits of
human population using median networks. Genetics , 141(2):743–753, 1995.
[12] H. -J. Bandelt, V . Macaulay, and M. Richards. Median networks: speedy construction and
greedy reduction, one simulation, and two case studies from human mtDNA. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 16(1):8–28, 2000.
[13] E. Bapteste, M. O’Malley, R. Beiko, et al. Prokaryotic evolution and the tree of life are two
different things. Biology Direct , 4(1):34, 2009.
[ 1 4 ] A .B a r b r o o k ,C .H o w e ,a n dN .B l a k e .T h ep h y l o g e n yo ft h eC a n t e r b u r yt a l e s . Nature ,
394:839, 1998.
343

344 References
[15] M. Baroni, S. Gr ¨uenewald, V . Moulton, and C. Semple. Bounding the number of hybridiza-
tion events for a consistent evolutionary history. Mathematical Biology, 51:171–182,
2005.
[16] M. Baroni, C. Semple, and M. Steel. Hybrids in real time. Systematic Biology, 55(1):46–56,
2006.
[17] J. -P . Barth ´elemy and A. Gu ´enoche. Trees and Proximity Representations . Wiley, 1991.
[18] R. Beiko and N. Hamilton. Phylogenetic identiﬁcation of lateral genetic transfer events.
BMC Evolutionary Biology , 6(1):15, 2006.
[19] C. Berthouly, G. Leroy, T. N. Van, et al. Genetic analysis of local Vietnamese chickens
provides evidence of gene ﬂow from wild to domestic populations. BMC Genetics, 10(1):1,
2009.
[ 2 0 ] J .B o h n e ,A .W .M .D r e s s ,a n dS .F i s c h e r .As i m p l ep r o o ff o rd eB r u i j n ’ sd u a l i z a t i o n
principle. Sankhya. Series A , 54(Special Issue):77–84, 1992.
[21] S. Bokhari and D. Janies. Reassortment networks for investigating the evolution of seg-
mented viruses. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,
99(RapidPosts), 2008.
[22] T. Bonfert, R. Rupp, and D. H. Huson. Phylogenetic networks from multi-labeled trees.
Poster presented at German Conference on Bioinformatics, Halle (Saale), 2009.
[23] K. S. Booth and G. S. Luecker. T esting for the consecutive ones property, interval graphs
and graph planarity using pq-tree algorithms. Journal of Computer and System Sciences ,
13:335–379, 1976.
[24] M. Bordewich, S. Linz, K. St. John, and C. Semple. A reduction algorithm for computing
the hybridization number of two trees. Evolutionary Bioinformatics, 3:86–98, 2007.
[25] M. Bordewich and C. Semple. On the computational complexity of the rooted subtree
prune and regraft distance. Annals of Combinatorics, 8(4):409–423, 2005.
[26] M. Bordewich and C. Semple. Computing th e hybridization number of two phylogenetic
trees is ﬁxed-parameter tractable. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, 4(3):458–466, 2007.
[27] M. Bordewich and C. Semple. Computing the minimum number of hybridisation events
for a consistent evolutionary history. Discrete Applied Mathematics , 155(8):914–928, 2007.
[28] L. Boto. Horizontal gene transfer in evolution: facts and challenges. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 277(1683):819–827, 2010.
[29] N. G. de Bruijn. Dualization of multigrids. Journal de Physique , 47(7 Suppl. Colloq.
C3):C3–9–C3–18, 1986.
[30] D. Bryant. Hunting for trees, building trees and comparing trees: theory and method in
phylogenetic analysis. PhD thesis, Department of Mathematics, University of Canterbury,1997.
[31] D. Bryant and V . Moulton. NeighborNet: an agglomerative method for the construction
of planar phylogenetic networks. In R. Guig and D. Gusﬁeld, eds., Algorithms in Bioinfor-
matics: Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Algorithms in Bioinformatics(WABI) , vol. 2452 of LNCS , pp. 375–391, 2002.
[32] D. Bryant and V . Moulton. Neighbor-Net: an agglomerative method for the construction
of phylogenetic networks. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 21(2):255–265, 2004.

345 References
[33] D. Bryant, V . Moulton, and A. Spillner. Consistency of the Neighbor-Net algorithm.
Algorithms for Molecular Biology , 2(1):8, 2007.
[34] A. Brysting, B. Oxelman, K. Huber, V . Moulton, and C. Brochmann. Untangling complex
histories of genome mergings in high polyploids. Systematic Biology, 56(3):467–476,
2007.
[35] P . Buendia and G. Narasimhan. Serial NetEvolve: a ﬂexible utility for generating serially-
sampled sequences along a tree or recombinant network. Bioinformatics, 22(18):2313–
2314, 2006.
[36] P . Buendia and G. Narasimhan. Sliding MinPD: building evolutionary networks of
serial samples via an automated recombination detection approach. Bioinformatics,
23(22):2993–3000, 2007.
[37] P . Buneman. The recovery of trees from measures of dissimilarity. In F. R. Hodson, D. G.
Kendall, and P . Tautu, eds., Mathematics in the Archaeological and Historical Sciences ,
pp. 387–395. Edinburgh University Press, 1971.
[38] G. Cardona, M. Llabr ´e s ,F .R o s s e l l ´o, and G. Valiente. A distance metric for a class of
tree-sibling phylogenetic networks. Bioinformatics, 24(13):1481–1488, 2008.
[39] G. Cardona, M. Llabr ´es, F. Rossell ´o, and G. Valiente. Metrics for phylogenetic networks I:
generalizations of the Robinson-Foulds metric. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational
Biology and Bioinformatics , 6(1):46–61, 2009.
[40] G. Cardona, M. Llabr ´e s ,F .R o s s e l l ´o, and G. Valiente. On Nakhleh’s metric for reduced
phylogenetic networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinfor-
matics, 6(4):629–638, 2009.
[41] G. Cardona, F. Rossell ´o, and G. Valiente. Comparison of tree-child phylogenetic networks.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, 6:552–569, 2007.
[42] G. Cardona, F. Rossell ´o, and G. Valiente. A Perl package and an alignment tool for
phylogenetic networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 9:175, 2008.
[43] G. Cardona, F. Rossell ´o, and G. Valiente. Extended Newick: it is time for a standard
representation of phylogenetic networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 9:532, 2008.
[44] F. Casado, C. R. Bonvicino, and H. N. Seuanez. Phylogeographic analyses of Callicebus
lugens (Platyrrhini, Primates). Journal of Heredity, 98(1):88–92, 2007.
[45] I. Cassens, P . Mardulyn, and M. C. Milinkovitch. Evaluating intraspeciﬁc “network”
construction methods using simulated sequence data: do existing algorithms outperformthe global maximum parsimony approach? Systematic Biology, 54(3):363–372, 2005.
[46] J. Castresana. Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for their use in
phylogenetic analysis. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 17(4):540–552, 2000.
[47] M. Castrucci, I. Donatelli, L. Sidoli, et al. Genetic reassortment between avian and human
inﬂuenza A viruses in Italian pigs. Virology , 193(1):503–506, 1993.
[48] M. A. Charleston. Jungles: a new solution to the host/parasite phylogeny reconciliation
problem. Mathematical Biosciences , 149:191–223, 1998.
[49] K. Chen, D. Durand, and M. Farach-Colton. Notung: dating gene duplications using gene
family trees. Journal of Computational Biology , 7(3):429–447, 2000.
[50] B. Chor and T. Tuller. Finding a maximum likelihood tree is hard. Journal of the ACM,
53(5):722–744, 2006.

346 References
[51] C. Choy, J. Jansson, K. Sadakane, and W. -K. Sung. Computing the maximum agreement
of phylogenetic networks. Theoretical Computer Science , 335(1):93–107, 2005.
[52] M. Clement, D. Posada, and K. A. Crandall. TCS: a computer program to estimate gene
genealogies. Molecular Ecology , 9:1657–1659, 2000.
[53] J. Cohen. Mathematics is biology’s next microscope, only better; biology is mathematics’
next physics, only better. PLoS Biology , 2(12):e439, 2004.
[54] L. A. David and E. J. Alm. Insights into the origins of microbial gene families. In press.
Software: AnGST, 2010.
[55] C. Delwiche. Tracing the thread of plastid diversity through the tapestry of life. American
Naturalist , 154:S164–S177, 1999.
[56] C. F. Delwiche and J. D. Palmer. Rampant horizontal transfer and duplication of
rubisco genes in eubacteria and plastids. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 13:873–882,
1996.
[57] R. Desper and O. Gascuel. Fast and accurate phylogeny reconstruction algorithms based
on the minimum-evolution principle. Journal of Computational Biology , 9(5):687–705,
2002.
[58] R. Desper and O. Gascuel. Theoretical foundation of the balanced minimum evolution
method of phylogenetic inference and its relationship to weighted least-squares tree ﬁtting.Molecular Biology and Evolution , 21(3):587–598, 2004.
[59] C. Dessimoz, D. Margadant, and G. H. Gonnet. DLIGHT: lateral gene transfer detection
using pairwise evolutionary distances in a statistical framework. In Research in Compu-
tational Molecular Biology: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Research inComputational Molecular Biology (RECOMB) , vol. 4955, LNCS , pp. 315–330. Springer,
2008.
[60] T. Disotell. Discovering human history from stomach bacteria. Genome Biology, 4(5):213,
2003.
[61] W. F. Doolittle. Phylogenetic classiﬁcation and the Universal Tree. Science , 284:2124–2128,
1999.
[62] A. W. M. Dress and D. H. Huson. Constructing splits graphs. IEEE/ACM Transactions in
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics , 1(3):109–115, 2004.
[63] A. W. M. Dress, V . Moulton, and W. T erhalle. T-theory: an overview. European Journal of
Combinatorics, 17(2-3):161–175, 1996.
[64] R. Durbin, S. R. Eddy, A. Krogh, and G. Mitchison. Biological Sequence Analysis .C a m -
bridge University Press, 1998.
[65] I. Ebersberger, P . Galgoczy, S. Taudien, et al. Mapping human genetic ancestry. Molecular
Biology and Evolution, 24(10):2266–2276, 2007.
[66] R. C. Edgar. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high through-
put. Nucleic Acids Research , 32(5):1792–97, 2004.
[67] A. W. F. Edwards and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. The reconstruction of evolution. Annals of
Human Genetics, 27:105–106, 1963.
[68] A. W. F. Edwards and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. Reconstruction of evolutionary trees. In V . H.
Heywood and J. McNeill, eds., Phenetic and Phylogenetic Classiﬁcation , vol. 6, pp. 67–76.
Systematics Association, London, 1964.

347 References
[69] J. Escobar, A. Cenci, C. Scornavacca, et al. Combining supermatrix and supertree in
Triticeea (Poaceae). Unpublished manuscript, 2010.
[70] G. F. Estabrook, F. R. McMorris, and C. A. Meacham. Comparison of undirected phylo-
genetic trees based on subtrees of four evolutionary units. Systematic Zoology , 34(2):193–
200, 1985.
[71] L. Excofﬁer, G. Laval, and S. Schneider. Arlequin ver. 3.0: an integrated software package
for population genetics data analysis. Evolutionary Bioinformatics Online , 1:47–50, 2005.
[72] L. Excofﬁer and P . Smouse. Using allele frequencies and geographic subdivision to recon-
struct gene trees within a species: molecular variance parsimony. Genetics , 136:343–359,
Jan. 1994.
[73] J. Felsenstein. Evolutionary trees from DNA sequences: a maximum likelihood approach.
Journal of Molecular Evolution , 17(6):368–376, 1981.
[74] J. Felsenstein. Statistical inference of phylogenies (with discussion). Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) , 146:246–272, 1983.
[75] J. Felsenstein. PHYLIP: phylogeny inference package (version 3.2). Cladistics, 5:164–166,
1989.
[76] J. Felsenstein. An alternating least squares approach to inferring phylogenies from pairwise
distances. Systematic Biology, 46(1):101–111, March 1997.
[77] J. Felsenstein. Inferring Phylogenies. Sinauer Associates, Inc., 2004.
[78] J. Felsenstein and G. A. Churchill. A hidden Markov model approach to variation among
sites in rate of evolution. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 13(1):93–104, 1996.
[79] W. M. Fitch. T oward deﬁning the course of evolution: minimum change for a speciﬁed
tree topology. Systematic Zoology , 20:406–416, 1971.
[80] W. M. Fitch. Networks and viral evolution. Journal of Molecular Evolution, 44:65–75, 1997.
[81] W. M. Fitch and E. Margoliash. Construction of phylogenetic trees. Science ,
155(3760):279–284, 1967.
[82] P . Gambette and D. H. Huson. Improved layout of phylogenetic networks. IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics , 5(3):472–479, 2008.
[83] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. Computers and intractability, a guide to the theory of
NP-completeness. Bell T elephone Laboratories, Inc., 1979.
[84] O. Gascuel and M. Steel. Neighbor-joining revealed. Molecular Biology and Evolution ,
23(11):1997–2000, 2006.
[85] D. G ¨om¨ory and L. Paule. Reticulate evolution patterns in western-Eurasian beeches.
Botanica Helvetica , 2010.
[86] P . G ´orecki. Reconciliation problems for duplication, loss and horizontal gene transfer.
InProceedings of the Eighth Annual Internation Conference on Research in Computational
Molecular Biology (RECOMB), pp. 316–325. ACM Press, 2004.
[87] Grass Phylogeny Working Group. Phylogeny and subfamilial classiﬁcation of the grasses
(Poaceae). Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden, 88(3):373–457, 2001.
[88] P . J. Green. Reversible jump Markov Chain Monte Carlo computation and Bayesian
model determination. Biometrika, 82(4):711–732, 1995.
[89] R. C. Grifﬁths and P . Marjoram. Ancestral inference from samples of DNA sequences with
recombination. Journal of Computational Biology , 3:479–502, 1996.

348 References
[90] R. C. Grifﬁths and P . Marjoram. An ancestral recombination graph. In P . Donnelly and
S. Tavar ´e, eds., Progress in Population Genetics and Human Evolution , vol. 87, IMA Volumes
of Mathematics and its Applications , pp. 257–270. Springer, 1997.
[91] S. Gr ¨unewald, K. F. amd A. W. M. Dress, and V . Moulton. QNet: an agglomerative method
for the construction of phylogenetic networks from weighted quartets. Molecular Biology
and Evolution , 24(2):532–538, 2007.
[92] S. Gr ¨unewald, K. T. Huber, and Q. Wu. Novel closure rules for constructing phylogenetic
super-networks. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 70:1906–1924, 2008.
[93] S. Gr ¨unewald, V . Moulton, and A. Spillner. Consistency of the QNet algorithm for
generating planar split networks from weighted quartets. Discrete Applied Mathemat-
ics, 157(10):2325–2334, 2009.
[94] S. Gr ¨unewald, M. A. Steel, and M. S. Swenson. Closure operations in phylogenetics.
Mathematical Biosciences , 208(2):521–537, 2007.
[95] D. Gusﬁeld. Optimal, efﬁcient reconstruction of root-unknown phylogenetic networks
with constrained and structured recombination. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
70:381–398, 2005.
[96] D. Gusﬁeld and V . Bansal. A fundamental decomposition theory for phylogenetic net-
works and incompatible characters. In Research in Computational Molecular Biology:
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Research in Computational MolecularBiology (RECOMB) , vol. 3500 of LNCS , pp. 217–232. Springer, 2005.
[97] D. Gusﬁeld, V . Bansal, V . Bafna, and Y. S. Song. A decomposition theory for phylogenetic
networks and incompatible characters. Journal of Computational Biology , 14(10):1247–
1272, 2007.
[98] D. Gusﬁeld, S. Eddhu, and C. Langley. Efﬁcient reconstruction of phylogenetic networks
with constrained recombinations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference
on Bioinformatics (CSB), p. 363. IEEE Computer Society, 2003.
[99] D. Gusﬁeld, S. Eddhu, and C. Langley. Optimal, efﬁcient reconstruction of phylogenetic
networks with constrained recombination. Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, 2(1):173–213, 2004.
[100] M. Hallett, J. Largergren, and A. T oﬁgh. Simultaneous identiﬁcation of duplications
and lateral transfers. In Proceedings of the Eight International Conference on Research in
Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB) , pp. 347–356. ACM Press, 2004.
[101] J. A. Hartigan. Minimum mutation ﬁts to a given tree. Biometrics, 29(1):53–65, 1973.
[102] D. L. Hartl and A. G. Clark. Principles of Population Genetics, Fourth Edition . Sinauer
Associates, Inc., 2006.
[103] M. Hasegawa, H. Kishino, and T. Y ano. Dating of the human-ape splitting by a molecular
clock of mitochondrial DNA. Journal of Molecular Evolution , 22(2):160–174, 1985.
[104] W. K. Hastings. Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applica-
tions. Biometrika, 57:97–109, 1970.
[105] J. Hein. Reconstructing evolution of seque nces subject to recombination using parsimony.
Mathematical Biosciences , 98(2):185–200, 1990.
[106] J. Hein. A heuristic method to reconstruct the history of sequences subject to recombi-
nation. Journal of Molecular Evolution , 36:396–405, 1993.

349 References
[107] J. Hein, T. Jiang, L. Wang, and K. Zhang. On the complexity of comparing evolutionary
trees. Discrete Applied Mathematics , 71(1–3):153–169, 1996.
[108] J. Hein, M. H. Schierup, and C. Wiuf. Gene Genealogies, Variation and Evolution : A Primer
in Coalescent Theory . Oxford University Press, February 2005.
[109] M. D. Hendy and D. Penny. Branch and bound algorithms to determine minimal evolu-
tionary trees. Mathematical Biosciences , 59(2):277–290, 1982.
[110] J. G. Henikoff and S. Henikoff. Blocks database and its applications. Methods in Enzymol-
ogy, 266:88–105, 1996.
[111] E. Hilario and J. P . Gogarten. Horizontal transfer of ATPase genes: the tree of life becomes
an e to fl i f e .Biosystems , 31:111–119, 1993.
[112] B. Holland, K. Huber, V . Moulton, and P . J. Lockhart. Using consensus networks to
visualize contradictory evidence for species phylogeny. Molecular Biology and Evolution ,
21:1459–1461, 2004.
[113] B. Holland and V . Moulton. Consensus networks: a method for visualizing incompati-
bilities in collections of trees. In G. Benson and R. Page, eds., Workshop on Algorithms in
Bioinformatics (WABI), vol. 2812, pp. 165–176. Springer, 2003.
[114] E. C. Holmes, M. Worobey, and A. Rambaut. Phylogenetic evidence for recombination
in dengue virus. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 16:405–409, 1999.
[115] K. Huber, L. van Iersel, S. Kelk, and R. Suchecki. A practical algorithm for reconstructing
level-1 phylogenetic networks. In IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, 2010.
[116] K. T. Huber, M. Langton, D. Penny, V . Moulton, and M. Hendy. Spectronet: a package for
computing spectra and median networks. Applied Bioinformatics , 1:159–161, 2002.
[117] K. T. Huber, B. Oxelman, M. Lott, and V . Moulton. Reconstructing the evolutionary history
of polyploids from multilabeled trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 23(9):1784–1791,
2006.
[118] R. R. Hudson and N. L. Kaplan. Statistical properties of the number of recombination
events in the history of a sample of DNA sequences. Genetics , 111:147–164, 1985.
[119] J. P . Huelsenbeck, F. Ronquist, R. Nielsen, and J. P . Bollback. Bayesian inference of phy-
logeny and its impact on evolutionary biology. Science , 294:2310–2314, 2001.
[120] D. Huson and C. Scornavacca. Dendroscope 2: a program for computing and draw-
ing rooted phylogenetic trees and networks. In preparation, software available from:
www.dendroscope.org , 2011.
[121] D. Huson and R. Rupp. Summarizing multiple gene trees using cluster networks. In Algo-
rithms in Bioinformatics: Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on Algorithmsin Bioinformaticsy (WABI) , vol. 5251, LNBI, pp. 211–225, 2008.
[122] D. H. Huson. SplitsTree: analyzing and visualizing evolutionary data. Bioinformatics,
14(10):68–73, 1998.
[123] D. H. Huson. Split networks and reticulate networks. In O. Gascuel and M. A. Steel, eds.,
Reconstructing Evolution: New Mathematical and Computational Advances , pp. 247–276.
Oxford University Press, 2007.
[124] D. H. Huson. Drawing rooted phylogenetic networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Com-
putational Biology and Bioinformatics , 6(1):103–109, 2009.

350 References
[125] D. H. Huson and D. Bryant. Application of phylogenetic networks in evolutionary
studies. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 23:254–267, 2006.
[126] D. H. Huson, T. Dezulian, T. Kloepper, and M. A. Steel. Phylogenetic super-networks
from partial trees. IEEE/ACM Transactions in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,
1(4):151–158, 2004.
[127] D. H. Huson, T. Kloepper, P . J. Lockhart, and M. A. Steel. Reconstruction of reticulate
networks from gene trees. In Research in Computational Molecular Biology: Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology(RECOMB), vol. 3500, LNCS , pp. 233–249. Springer, 2005.
[128] D. H. Huson and T. H. Kl ¨opper. Computing recombination networks from binary
sequences. Bioinformatics, 21(suppl. 2):ii159–ii165, 2005.
[129] D. H. Huson and T. H. Kl ¨opper. Beyond galled trees: decomposition and computa-
tion of galled networks. In Research in Computational Molecular Biology: Proceedings of
the 11th International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology(RECOMB), vol. 4453 of LNCS , pp. 211–225. Springer, 2007.
[130] D. H. Huson, D. C. Richter, C. Rausch, et al. Dendroscope: an interactive viewer for large
phylogenetic trees. BMC Bioinformatics, 8(1):460, 2007.
[131] D. H. Huson, R. Rupp, V . Berry, P . Gambette, and C. Paul. Computing galled networks
from real data. Bioinformatics, 25(12):i85–i93, 2009.
[132] D. H. Huson, M. A. Steel, and J. Whitﬁeld. Reducing distortion in phylogenetic networks.
In P . B ¨ucher and B. M. E. Moret, editors, Algorithms in Bioinformatics. Proceedings of
the 6th International Workshop on Algorithms in Bioinformatics (WABI) , vol. 4175, LNBI,
pp. 150–161. Springer, 2006.
[133] L. van Iersel, J. Keijsper, S. Kelk, L. Stougie, F. Hagen, and T. Boekhout. Constructing level-
2 phylogenetic networks from triplets. In Research in Computational Molecular Biology:
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Research in Computational MolecularBiology (RECOMB) , vol. 4955, LNCS , pp. 450–462. Springer, 2008.
[134] L. van Iersel and S. Kelk. Constructing the simplest possible phylogenetic network from
triplets. Algorithmica , 2009. DOI 10.1007/s00453-009-9333-0.
[135] L. van Iersel and S. Kelk. When two trees go to war. In preparation, 2011.[136] L. van Iersel, S. Kelk, R. Rupp, and D. Huson. Phylogenetic networks do not need to
be complex: using fewer reticulations to represent conﬂicting clusters. Bioinformatics,
26(12):i124–131, 2010.
[137] J. Isbell. Six theorems about injective metric spaces. Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici ,
39(1):65–76, 1964.
[138] J. Jansson. On the complexity of inferring rooted evolutionary trees. Electronic Notes in
Discrete Mathematics , 7:50–53, 2001.
[139] J. Jansson, N. B. Nguyen, and W. -K. Sung. Algorithms for combining rooted triplets into
a galled phylogenetic network. SIAM Journal on Computing , 35(5):1098–1121, 2006.
[140] J. Jansson and W. -K. Sung. Inferring a level-1 phylogenetic network from a dense set of
rooted triplets. In Computing and Combinatorics: Proceedings of the 10th Annual Inter-
national Conference on Computing and Combinatorics (COCOON) , vol. 3106, LNCS ,
pp. 462–471. Springer, 2004.

351 References
[141] G. Jin, L. Nakhleh, S. Snir, and T. Tuller. Efﬁcient parsimony-based methods for phyloge-
netic network reconstruction. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computational
Biology (ECCB), vol. 23, Bioinformatics, pp. e123–e128, 2006.
[142] G. Jin, L. Nakhleh, S. Snir, and T. Tuller. Maximum likelihood of phylogenetic networks.
Bioinformatics, 22(21):2604–2611, 2006.
[143] G. Jin, L. Nakhleh, S. Snir, and T. Tuller. Inferring phylogenetic networks by the maxi-
mum parsimony criterion: a case study. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 24(1):324–337,
2007.
[144] T. H. Jukes and C. R. Cantor. Evolution of protein molecules. In H. N. Munro, ed.,
Mammalian Protein Metabolism , pages 21–132. Academic Press, 1969.
[145] I. A. Kanj, L. Nakhleh, C. Than, and G. Xia. Seeing the trees and their branches in the
network is hard. Theoretical Computer Science , 401(1–3):153–164, 2008.
[146] R. M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In R. E. Miller and J. W.
Thatcher, eds., Complexity of Computer Computations, pp. 85–103. Plenum Press,
1972.
[147] L. Kils-Hutten, R. Cheynier, S. Wain-Hobson, and A. Meyerhans. Phylogenetic reconstruc-
tion of intrapatient evolution of human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1: predominanceof drift and purifying selection. Journal of General Virology , 82(7):1621–1627, 2001.
[148] M. Kimura. A simple method for estimating evolutionary rates of base substitutions
through comparative studies of nucleotide sequences. Journal of Molecular Evolution ,
16(2):111–120, 1980.
[149] M. Kimura. Estimation of evolutionary distances between homologous nucleotide
sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 78(1):454–458, 1981.
[150] M. Kimura and J. Crow. The number of alleles that can be maintained in a ﬁnite popula-
tion. Genetics , 49:725–738, 1964.
[151] T. Kivisild, M. Bamshad, K. Kaldma, et al. Deep common ancestry of Indian and western
Eurasian mtDNA lineages. Current Biology , 9:1331–1334, 1999.
[152] T. Kl ¨opper. Algorithms for the calculation and visualization of phylogenetic networks .P h D
thesis, Center for Bioinformatics, University of T ¨ubingen, 2008.
[153] S. Koblmuller, N. Duftner, K. Sefc, et al. Reticulate phylogeny of gastropod-shell-breeding
cichlids from Lake Tanganyika: the result of repeated introgressive hybridization. BMC
Evolutionary Biology, 7(1):7, 2007.
[154] M. A. Koch, C. Dobes, C. Kiefer, et al. Supernetwork identiﬁes multiple events of plastid
trnF(GAA) pseudogene evolution in the Brassicaceae. Molecular Biology and Evolution ,
24(1):63–73, 2007.
[155] J. Kruskal. On the shortest spanning tree of a graph and the traveling salesman problem.
Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society , 7:48–50, 1956.
[156] H. W. Kuhn. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics
Quarterly , 2:83–97, 1955.
[157] V . Kunin, L. Goldovsky, N. Darzentas, and C. A. Ouzounis. The net of life: reconstructing
the microbial phylogenetic network. Genome Research , 15(7):954–959, 2005.
[158] C. Lanave, G. Preparata, C. Saccone, and G. Serio. A new method for calculating evolu-
tionary substitution rates. Journal of Molecular Evolution , 20(1):86–93, 1984.

352 References
[159] R. Lapointe, K. Tanaka, W. E. Barney, et al. Genomic and morphological features of
a banchine polydnavirus: comparison with bracoviruses and ichnoviruses. Journal of
Virology , 81(12):6491–6501, 2007.
[160] B. Larget and D. L. Simon. Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms for the Bayesian
analysis of phylogenetic trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 16(6):750–759, Jul. 1999.
[161] J. Leebens-Mack, L. A. Raubeson, L. Cui, et al. Identifying the basal angiosperm node
in chloroplast genome phylogenies: sampling one’s way out of the Felsenstein Zone.Molecular Biology and Evolution , 22(10):1948–1963, 2005.
[162] P . Legendre and V . Makarenkov. Reconstruction of biogeographic and evolutionary net-
works using reticulograms. Systematic Biology, 51(2):199–216, 2002.
[163] P . Lemey, M. Salemi, and A. -M. Vandamme, eds. The Phylogenetic Handbook, 2nd ed.
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[164] T. Lengauer and R. E. Tarjan. A fast algorithm for ﬁnding dominators in a ﬂowgraph.
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems , 1(1):121–141, 1979.
[165] C. R. Linder and L. H. Rieseberg. Reconstructing patterns of reticulate evolution in plants.
American Journal of Botany , 91:1700–1708, 2004.
[166] S. Linz and C. Semple. A cluster reduction for computing the subtree distance between
phylogenies. Annals of Combinatorics, in press, 2010.
[167] M. Lott, A. Spillner, K. T. Huber, and V . Moulton. Padre: a package for analyzing and
displaying reticulate evolution. Bioinformatics, 25(9):1199–1200, 2009.
[168] E. Luks. Isomorphism of graphs of bounded valence can be tested in polynomial time.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 25:42–65, 1982.
[169] R. B. Lyngso and Y. S. Song. Minimum recombination histories by branch and bound. In
Algorithms in Bioinformatics: Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Algorithmsin Bioinformaticsy (WABI) , vol. 3692, LNBI, pp. 239–250. Springer, 2005.
[170] D. R. Maddison, D. L. Swofford, and W. P . Maddison. NEXUS: an extendible ﬁle format
for systematic information. Systematic Biology, 46(4):590–621, 1997.
[171] V . Makarenkov. T-REX: reconstructing and visualizing phylogenetic trees and
reticulation networks. Bioinformatics, 17(7):664–668, 2001.
[172] V . Makarenkov and P . Legendre. From a phylogenetic tree to a reticulated network.
Journal of Computational Biology , 11(1):195–212, 2004.
[173] W. Martin. Mosaic bacterial chromosomes: a challenge en route to a tree of genomes.
Bioessays, 21(2):99–104, 1999.
[174] C. A. Meacham. Theoretical and computational considerations of the compatibility of
qualitative taxonomic characters. In J. Felsenstein, ed., Numerical T axonomy, vol. G1.
Springer, 1983.
[175] N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. T eller, and E. T eller. Equation
of state calculations by fast computing machines. Journal of Chemical Physics, 21(6):1087–
1092, 1953.
[176] C. M. Miller-Butterworth, D. S. Jacobs, and E. H. Harley. Strong population substructure is
correlated with morphology and ecology in a migratory bat. Nature , 424(6945):187–191,
July 2003.

353 References
[177] S. Mitra, J. A. Gilbert, D. Field, and D. H. Huson. Comparison of multiple
metagenomes using phylogenetic networks based on ecological indices. ISME Jour-
nal, doi:10.1038/ismej.2010.51, 2010 (see http://www.nature.com/ismej/journal/vaop/ncurrent/abs/ismej201051a.html).
[178] G. Moore, M. Goodman, and J. Barnabas. An iterative approach from the standpoint of
the additive hypothesis to the dendrogram problem posed by molecular data sets. Journal
of Theoretical Biology , 38:423–457, 1973.
[179] B. M. E. Moret, L. Nakhleh, T. Warnow, et al. Phylogenetic networks: modeling, recon-
structibility, and accuracy. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioin-
formatics , 1(1):13–23, 2004.
[180] D. Morrison. Networks in phylogenetic analysis: new tools for population biology. Inter-
national Journal for Parasitology , 35(5):567–582, 2005.
[181] D. Morrison. Phylogenetic networks in systematic biology (and elsewhere). In R. Mohan,
ed.,Research Advances in Systematic Biology , pp. 1–48. Global Research Network, Trivan-
drum, India, 2010.
[182] V . Moulton and K. T. Huber. Split networks. a tool for exploring complex evolution-
ary relationships in molecular data. In P . Lemey, M. Salemi, and A. -M. Vandamme,eds., The Phylogenetic Handbook , 2nd edn. pp. 631–653. Cambridge University Press,
2009.
[183] L. Nakhleh. A metric on the space of reduced phylogenetic networks. IEEE/ACM Trans-
actions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics , 99(RapidPosts), 2009.
[184] L. Nakhleh. Evolutionary phylogenetic networks: models and issues. In L. L. S. Heath and
N. Ramakrishnan, eds., The Problem Solving Handbook for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics. Springer, 2010.
[185] L. Nakhleh, T. Warnow, and C. R. Linder. Reconstructing reticulate evolution in species:
theory and practice. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Research in
Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB) , pp. 337–346. ACM Press, 2004.
[186] S. B. Needleman and C. D. Wunsch. A general method applicable to the search for
similarities in the amino acid sequences of two proteins. Journal of Molecular Biology ,
48:443–453, 1970.
[187] M. Nei. Estimation of average heterozygosity and genetic distance from a small number
of individuals. Genetics , 89:583–590, 1978.
[188] C. Notredame, D. G. Higgins, and J. Heringa. T-Coffee: a novel method for fast and
accurate multiple sequence alignment. Journal of Molecular Biology , 302(1):205–217,
2000.
[189] H. Ochman, J. G. Lawrence, and E. A. Groisman. Lateral gene transfer and the nature of
bacterial innovation. Nature , 405(6784):299–304, 2000.
[190] K. O’Donnell, H. Kistler, B. Tacke, and H. Casper. Gene genealogies reveal global phylogeo-
graphic structure and reproductive isolation among lineages of Fusarium graminearum ,
the fungus causing wheat scab. PNAS, 97(14):7905–7910, 2000.
[191] R. D. M. Page. On islands of trees and the efﬁcacy of different methods of branch swapping
in ﬁnding most-parsimonious trees. Systematic Biology, 42(2):200–210, 1993.

354 References
[192] R. D. M. Page. Modiﬁed mincut supertrees. In R. Guig ´o and D. Gusﬁeld, eds., Algo-
rithms in Bioinformatics: Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Algorithms inBioinformatics (WABI), vol. 2452 of LNCS , pp. 537–552, 2002.
[193] E. Paradis. pegas: an R package for population genetics with an integrated-modular
approach. Bioinformatics, 26(3):419–420, 2010.
[194] L. Parida, M. Mel ´e, F. Calafell, and J. Bertranpetit. Estimating the ancestral recombinations
graph (ARG) as compatible networks of SNP patterns. Journal of Computational Biology ,
15(9):1133–1153, 2008.
[195] N. Patterson, D. J. Richter, S. Gnerre, E. S. Lander, and D. Reich. Genetic evi-
dence for complex speciation of humans and chimpanzees. Nature , 441:1103–1108,
2006.
[196] Y. Pauplin. Direct calculation of a tree length using a distance matrix. Journal of Molecular
Biology, 51(1):41–47, 2000.
[197] P . J. Planet, S. C. Kachlany, D. H. Fine, R. DeSalle, and D. H. Figurski. The widespread
colonization island of Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans .Nature Genetics , 34:193–198,
2003.
[198] D. Posda and K. A. Crandall. The effect of recombination on the accuracy of phylogeny
estimation. Journal of Molecular Evolution , 54:396–402, 2002.
[199] R. C. Prim. Shortest connection networks and some generalizations. Bell System Technol-
ogy Journal , 36:1389–1401, 1957.
[200] S. J. Prohaska, C. Fried, C. T. Amemiya, F. H. Ruddle, G. P . Wagner, and P . F. Stadler.
The shark HoxN cluster is homologous to the human HoxD cluster. Journal of Molecular
Evolution, 58:212–217, 2004.
[201] L. H. Rieseberg. Hybrid origins of plant species. Annual Review of Ecology Evolution and
Systematics, 28:359–389, 1997.
[202] L. H. Rieseberg, S. J. E. Baird, and K. A. Gardner. Hybridization, introgression, and linkage
evolution. Plant Molecular Biology , 42:205–224, 2000.
[203] D. F. Robinson. Comparison of labeled trees with valency three. Journal of Combinatorial
Theory, Series B, 11(2):105–119, 1971.
[204] D. F. Robinson and L. R. Foulds. Comparison of phylogenetic trees. Mathematical Bio-
sciences , 53:131–147, 1981.
[205] F. Rodr ´ıguez, J. L. Oliver, A. Mar ´ın, and J. R. Medina. The general stochastic model of
nucleotide substitution. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 142(4):485–501, 1990.
[206] A. Rokas, B. L. Williams, N. King, and S. B. Carroll. Genome-scale approaches to resolving
incongruence in molecular phylogenies. Nature , 425:798–804, 2003.
[207] D. Ruths and L. Nakhleh. Recombination and phylogeny: effects and detection. Interna-
tional Journal of Bioinformatics Research and Applications , 1(2):202–212, 2005.
[208] N. Saitou and M. Nei. The Neighbor-Joining method: a new method for reconstructing
phylogenetic trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 4:406–425, 1987.
[209] M. Salemi, T. De Oliveira, V . Courgnaud, et al. Mosaic genomes of the six major primate
lentivirus lineages revealed by phylogenetic analyses. Journal of Virology, 77(13):7202–
7213, 2003.

355 References
[210] D. Sankoff. Minimal mutation trees of sequences. SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics ,
28:35–42, 1975.
[211] M. H. Schierup and J. Hein. Consequences of recombination on traditional phylogenetic
analysis. Genetics , 156:879–891, 2000.
[212] C. Scornavacca, V . Berry, V . Lefort, E. J. P . Douzery, and V . Ranwez. PhySIC IST: clean-
ing source trees to infer more informative supertrees. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(8):413,
2008.
[213] C. Semple. Reconstructing minimal rooted trees. Discrete Applied Mathematics ,
127(3):489–503, 2003.
[214] C. Semple. Hybridization networks. In O. Gascuel and M. Steel, eds., Reconstructing Evo-
lution: New Mathematical and Computational Advances , pp. 277–314. Oxford University
Press, 2007.
[215] C. Semple and M. Steel. A supertree method for rooted trees. Discrete Applied Mathematics ,
105(1–3):147–158, 2000.
[216] C. Semple and M. Steel. Cyclic permutations and evolutionary trees. Advances in Applied
Mathematics, 32(4):669–680, 2004.
[217] C. Semple and M. A. Steel. Phylogenetics . Oxford University Press, 2003.
[218] T. F. Smith and M. S. Waterman. Identiﬁcation of common molecular subsequences.
Journal of Molecular Biology , 147:195–197, 1981.
[219] P . Sneath. Cladistic representation of reticulate evolution. Systematic Zoology , 24(3):360–
368, 1975.
[220] R. R. Sokal and C. D. Michener. A statistical method for evaluating systematic relation-
ships. University of Kansas Scientiﬁc Bulletin, 28:1409–1438, 1958.
[221] Y. S. Song. A concise necessary and sufﬁcient condition for the existence of a galled-
tree. IEEE/ACM Transactions in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, 3(2):186–191,
2006.
[222] Y. S. Song and J. Hein. Parsimonious reconstruction of sequence evolution and haplotype
blocks: Finding the minimum number of recombination events. In Algorithms in Bioin-
formatics: Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Algorithms in Bioinformatics(WABI), vol. 2812, LNBI, pp. 287–302, 2003.
[223] Y. S. Song and J. Hein. On the minimum number of recombination events in the
evolutionary history of DNA sequences. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 48:160–186,
2004.
[224] Y. S. Song and J. Hein. Constructing minimal ancestral recombination graphs. Journal of
Computational Biology, 12(2):147–69, 2005.
[225] Y. S. Song, Y. Wu, and D. Gusﬁeld. Efﬁcient computation of close lower and upper
bounds on the minimum number of recombinations in biological sequence evolution.Bioinformatics, 21:413–422, 2005.
[226] M. Spencer, E. A. Davidson, A. C. Barbrook, and C. J. Howe. Phylogenetics of artiﬁcial
manuscripts. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 227(4):503 – 511, 2004.
[227] M. A. Steel and A. M. Hamel. Finding a maximum compatible tree is NP-hard for
sequences and trees. Applied Mathematics Letters , 9(2):55–59, 1996.

356 References
[228] K. Strimmer and V . Moulton. Likelihood analysis of phylogenetic networks using directed
graphical models. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 17(6):875–881, 2000.
[229] J. A. Studier and K. J. Keppler. A note on the neighbor-joining method of Saitou and Nei.
Molecular Biology and Evolution , 5(6):729–731, 1988.
[230] D. L. Swofford, G. J. Olsen, P . J. Waddell, and D. M. Hillis. Chapter 11: Phylogenetic
inference. In D. M. Hillis, C. Moritz, and B. K. Mable, eds., Molecular Systematics ,
2nd edn., pp. 407–514. Sinauer Associates, Inc., 1996.
[231] M. Syvanen. Cross-species gene transfer; implications for a new theory of evolution.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 112(2):333–43, 1985.
[232] K. Tamura and M. Nei. Estimation of the number of nucleotide substitutions in the
control region of mitochondrial DNA in humans and chimpanzees. Molecular Biology
and Evolution , 10(3):512–526, 1993.
[233] A. R. T empleton, K. A. Crandall, and C. F. Sing. A cladistic analysis of phenotypic
associations with haplotypes inferred from restriction endonuclease mapping and DNAsequence data III cladogram estimation. Genetics , 132:619–633, 1992.
[234] C. Than, D. Ruths, and L. Nakhleh. PhyloNet: a software package for analyzing and
reconstructing reticulate evolutionary relationships. BMC Bioinformatics, 9:322, 2008.
[235] J. D. Thompson, D. G. Higgins, and T. J. Gibson. CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of
progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-speciﬁcgap penalties and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Research , 22:4673–4680, 1994.
[236] T. -H. T o and M. Habib. Level-k phylogenetic networks are constructable from a dense
triplet set in polynomial time. In Combinatorial Pattern Matching: Proceeding of the 20th
Annual Symposium Combinatorial Pattern Matching (CPM) , vol. 5577, LNCS , pp. 275–
288, 2009.
[237] A. T oﬁgh, M. Hallet, and J. Lagergren. Simultaneous identiﬁcation of duplications and lat-
eral gene transfers. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,
99(PrePrints), 2010.
[238] A. T oﬁgh and J. Lagergren. Inferring duplications and lateral gene transfers- an algorithm
for parametric tree reconciliation. Unpublished manuscript, 2009.
[239] J. Wagele and C. Mayer. Visualizing differences in phylogenetic information content of
alignments and distinction of three classes of long-branch effects. BMC Evolutionary
Biology, 7(1):147, 2007.
[240] L. Wang and T. Jiang. On the complexity of multiple sequence alignment. Journal of
Computational Biology, 1(4):337–348, 1994.
[241] L. Wang, K. Zhang, and L. Zhang. Perfect phylogenetic networks with recombination.
Journal of Computational Biology , 8(1):69–78, 2001.
[242] D. Weigel and R. Mott. The 1001 genomes project for Arabidopsis thaliana. Genome
Biology, 10(5):107, 2009.
[243] J. Whitﬁeld, S. Cameron, D. Huson, and M. Steel. Filtered Z-closure supernetworks
for extracting and visualizing recurrent signal from incongruent gene trees. Systematic
Biology, 57(6):939–947, 2008.
[244] B. Y. Wu. Constructing the maximum consensus tree from rooted triples. Journal of
Combinatorial Optimization , 8(1):29–39, 2004.

357 References
[245] G. -S. Wu, Y. -G. Y ao, K. -X. Qu, et al. Population phylogenomic analysis of mitochondrial
DNA in wild boars and domestic pigs revealed multiple domestication events in East Asia.Genome Biology, 8(11):R245, 2007.
[246] Z. Y ang. Among-site rate variation and its impact on phylogenetic analyses. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution , 11:367–372, 1996.
[247] A. Zharkikh. Estimation of evolutionary distances between nucleotide sequences. Journal
of Molecular Evolution , 39(3):315–329, 1994.

Index
D-split, 112
X-tree, 25,91,139
µ-distance, 179
p-split, 219
3-SAT, 169
abstract network, 71
acyclic agreement forest, 281
acyclic DLT scenario, 298
acyclic graph, 5
Adams consensus tree, 65
additive distances, 51,254
adjacent, 3
afﬁne gap penalty, 16
agreement forest, 276
Aho algorithm, 301
Aho graph, 301
alignment, rooted phylogenetic networks, 181
ancestor, 8
ancestral recombination graph, 79,236
apex of a reticulation, 162
arc,7
ARG, 79,236
Arlequin, software, 335
backbone clusters, 194
backbone tree, 194
balanced average distance, 57
balanced edge length, 57
balanced minimum evolution, 56
balanced minimum evolution tree, 59
Bayes’ Theorem, 45
Beagle, software, 335
bicombining network, 140
bicombining node, 76,140
biconnected component, 6
bifurating node, 8
bifurcation, rooted phylogenetic network, 140
Bio-PhyloNetwork, software, 335
bipartite graph, 6,94
blocks, 15
BLOSUM matrix, 15,20
BME, 56
bootstrapping, 44bottom-up algorithm, 11
branch, 7,24
branch-and-bound, 36
branch-swapping methods, 38
breadth-ﬁrst traversal, DAG, 11
breadth-ﬁrst traversal, tree, 10
Buneman graph, 98
Buneman index, 109
Buneman tree, 110
burn in, 47
canonical split network, 98
Cass algorithm, 212
caterpillar chain, 278
chain reduction, 278, 283
character, 22,217
character state, 22
child, 8
circular cladogram, network, 322
circular cladogram, tree, 315
circular distance matrix, 254
circular network algorithm, 72,105, 190, 254, 259,
310, 330, 332
circular ordering, 103
circular phylogram, network, 326
circular phylogram, tree, 324
circular splits, 102
clade, 11
cladogram, 312
clique, 131
cluster, 11,128, 129
cluster containment problem, 168
cluster distance, trees, 62
cluster network, 76,134, 193, 334
cluster reduction, 282
cluster weight, 128
cluster-popping algorithm, 135, 193, 274, 288
collapsible, 304
CombineTrees, software, 335
combining view, 81,327
compatible, binary characters, 217
compatible, clusters, 130
compatible, splits, 71,90
composite taxon, 195
358

359 Index
condensed multiple alignment, 216
connected component of a graph, 6
connected graph, 6
Consecutive Ones problem, 103
consensus cluster network, 274
consensus split network, 266, 332
consensus super cluster network, 275
consensus tree, 265
contact edge, 327
contained tree, split network, 121
contraction, edge, 6,27
contraction, split, 121
convex hull, 187, 219
convex hull algorithm, 72,101, 187, 253, 332
cut edge, 6
cut node, 6
cycle, 5
DAG, 8,70
DAG traversals, 10
data-display network, 71
decomposable distance matrix, 119
decomposable set of clusters, 151
decomposition property, 151
decomposition, divide-and-conquer, 156, 194
degree of a node, 5
deletion, 14
Dendroscope, software, 77,81,82,193, 202, 215,
299, 328, 331, 334
dense rooted triples, 304
descendant, 8
digraph, 4
directed acyclic graph, 8
directed cycle, 5
directed edge, 4
directed graph, 4
directed path, 5
displayed cluster, 129
displayed tree, 144
displayed trees distance, softwired networks, 177
distance function, 50
distance matrix, 50,250
distance-based methods, 50
distances represented by splits, 251
distortion of a split, 274
divide-and-conquer, decomposition-based, 195
DLT, 289
DLT scenario, 294
duplication–loss, 291
edge, 3
edge assignment map, 151, 159
edge coloring, 93
edge length, 323
edge weight, 323
edge-weighted tree, 27
edit distance, 14
EEEP , software, 335
embedded network, 140
evolutionary network, 71
explicit network, 71FastME, 59
Felsenstein’s algorithm, 43
ﬁnite metric space, 122
ﬁt, split decomposition, 119
Fitch algorithm, 34
Fitch-Hartigan, 34
ﬂat prior, 45
four-point condition, 51
gall, 156
galled network, 162, 201, 334
galled tree, 156, 240
GalledTree, software, 336
Gamma distribution, 31
gap extension penalty, 17
gap open penalty, 17
gap penalty, 16
gaps, 14
gene duplication, 289
gene loss, 289
gene phylogeny, 289
general time reversible model, 31
geodesically pruned quasi-median network, 232
global alignment, 17
guide tree, 21,316
Hamming distance, 33,50
haplotype, 75,216
haplotype network, 75
hardwired, 76,193
hardwired cluster distance, 173
hardwired clusters, 146
hardwired interpretation, 147
hardwired network, 148
Hasegawa–Kishino–Y ano model, 31
Hasse diagram, 133, 243
homologous, 13,20
horizontal gene transfer, 289
HybridInterleave, software, 336
hybridization network, 77,275, 335
identiﬁable models, 32
identity, 172
immediate dominator, 142
in-edge, 4
incident, 3
incomparable, 292
incomparable edges, 9
incomparable nodes, 9
incompatibility graph, 91,130
incompatible, binary characters, 217
incompatible, clusters, 130
incompatible, splits, 90
indegree, 4
indistinguishable networks, 172
induced clusters, 129
induced graph, 5
induced phylogenetic network, 143
induced phylogenetic tree, 61
induced splits, 88
inﬁnite sites, 235

360 Index
inner circular cladogram, tree, 316
inorder traversal, tree, 10
insertion, 14
internal node, 7
isolation index, 111
isomorphic rooted networks, 177
isomorphism distance function, 178
Jukes-Cantor model, 29
Jukes-Cantor transformation, 51
jungle, 337
Kuratowski map, 125
large parsimony problem, 35
LCA, lowest common ancestor, 140
leaf node, 7,139
length, edge, 26
level of a node, 313
level, rooted phylogenetic network, 160
level-k network, 160, 303, 334
LEVEL2, software, 336
linear gap penalty, 16
local algorithm, 47
local alignment, 18,19
local-tree graph, 237
lower edge, 9
lower node, 8
lowest common ancestor, 140, 292
lowest common ancestor, taxa, 64
lowest stable ancestor, 142
LSA consensus tree, 65,143
LSA tree, 142, 318
LSA∗tree, 318
majority consensus tree, 64,265, 335
Markov chain Monte Carlo, 46
MARLON, software, 336
matching, 182
Max Clique, 131
maximum acyclic agreement forest, 281
maximum agreement forest, 278
Maximum Compatibility problem, 131
maximum likelihood estimation, 40
maximum parsimony method, 33,272
maximum parsimony problem, 33
maximum weighted matching, 182
MC3,48
MCMC, 46
median closure, 220
median network, 220, 332, 333
median sequence, 220
median-joining, 227, 332, 333
metric, 50
Metropolis-coupled Markov chain Monte Carlo,
48
Metropolis–Hastings algorithm, 46
minimum galled network, 164
minimum galled tree, 157
minimum spanning network, 229, 332, 335
minimum spanning tree, 229MLE, 40
model of sequence evolution, 32
model tree, 29
molecular clock hypothesis, 52
monophyletic group, 11
multi-labeled tree, 80,287, 289, 335
multicombining node, 140
multifurcating node, 8
multiple crossover, 234
multiple sequence alignment, 20
MY-CLOSURE, software, 336
naive algorithm, networks, 316
nearest neighbor interchange, 38
Needleman–Wunsch, 18
neighbor-joining method, 54
neighbor-net method, 254, 308, 332
nested clusters, 130
nested labels, 180, 288
nested sets, 65
nested-labels distance, 180
nestedness, cluster networks, 135
netting method, 249
network alignment graph, 181
network of life, 70
Network, software, 75,249, 333
Newick format, network, 81,334
Newick format, tree, 66,81,334
Nexus format, 332, 334
NNI, 38
NNI distance, 62
node, 3
nonparametric bootstrapping, 44
normalized Hamming distance, 50
Notung, software, 336
NP-complete problem, 169
observed p-distance, 50
offset parameter, 325
onX,11
Optimal Consecutive Ones problem, 104
ordinary least squares, 60
out-edge, 4
outdegree, 5
outer-labeled planar, 104, 254
outgroup, 89
outgroup rooting, 26
outgroup trick, 89
overlap alignment, 18
PADRE, software, 299, 336
pairwise alignment, 14
parametric bootstrapping, 44
paraphyletic group, 12
parent, 8
parsimony index, 218
parsimony score, 35
parsimony splits, 111, 218
partial order, 132
partial split, 112, 268
partial tree, 268

361 Index
partially ordered set, 132
path-multiplicity distance, 179
path-multiplicity vector, 179
patristic distance, 51
PEGAS, software, 336
phylogenetic network, 69
phylogenetic tree, 25
phylogeny, 11
phylogram, 27,323
PhyloNet, software, 336
planar, 190
plane drawing, 317
polyphyletic group, 12
posterior probability, 45
postorder traversal, DAG, 10
postorder traversal, tree, 10
preorder traversal, DAG, 10
preorder traversal, tree, 10
prior probability, 45
prior probability distribution, 45
probability of parsimony, 75,334
processing pipeline, SplitsTree, 332
progressive alignment, 21
projection of splits, 98
properly contained, 156
purines, 15
pyrimidines, 15
QNet method, 308
QNet, software, 74,336
quartet distance, 62
quartet topology, 108
quartet-net method, 308
quasi-median, 224
quasi-median closure, 224
quasi-median network, 224
radial diagram, split network, 330
radial diagram, tree, 329
reassortment, 79
reassortment network, 80
Recodon, software, 336
recombination network, 79,233, 235
recombination node, 235
RecPars, software, 336
rectangular cladogram, network, 322
rectangular cladogram, tree, 315
rectangular phylogram, network, 325
rectangular phylogram, tree, 324
reduced median network, 222, 333
reducedness, cluster networks, 135
reﬁnement, 6
related species, 11
relaxed minimum spanning network, 230
replacement, 14
representation of a cluster, 129
represented clusters, cluster network, 135
represented tree, 144
resolved tree, 8
r e s o l v e d ,r o o t e dp h y l o g e n e t i cn e t w o r k , 140
restricted quasi-median, 232restriction, clusters, 129
restriction, phylogenetic tree, 61,275, 300
restriction, splits, 88
reticulate edge, 134, 139
reticulate node, 134, 139
reticulation, 134, 139
reticulation-separation, 135, 159, 288
reticulogram, 75,261
Robinson-Foulds distance, 61,122
root node, network, 139
root node, tree, 7
rootedX-network, 139
rooted phylogenetic network, 76,138
rooted SPR, 277
rooted tree, 7
rooted tree, phylogenetic, 26
rooted triple, 300
rooted triple distance, 62
rooted triple encoding, 300
rooting a tree, 7
rSPR, 277
rSPR distance, 62,277
seed-growing algorithm, 203
separated taxa, 129
separation property, 163
sequence-based methods, 33
Serial NetEvolve, software, 336
SHRUB, software, 337
sibling nodes, 166
simple graph, 4
single crossover, 234
Sliding MinPD, software, 337
small parsimony problem, 34
Smith-Waterman algorithm, 19
softwired, 76
softwired cluster distance, 174
softwired clusters, 146
softwired interpretation, 147
softwired network, 148
species phylogeny, 289
Spectronet, software, 337
split, 12,44,87,88
split decomposition, 111, 114, 332
split encoding, 89
split extension, 112
split graph, 94,329
split metric, 116
split network, 71,96,266, 329
split network, embedding of, 329
split part, 88
split prime residue, 116
split represented by e,89
split size, 88
split weight, 88
SplitsTree, software, 72,75,192, 249, 253, 259, 299,
331, 332
SPR, 38,335
SPR distance, 40,62
stable ancestor, 142, 171, 175
stable descendant, 175

362 Index
star decomposition heuristic, 37
star tree, 37
stationarity, 47
statistical consistency, 32
statistical parsimony, 75,334
stepwise-addition heuristic, 37
strict consensus tree, 63,265, 335
strongly connected, 6
sub-DAG rooted at v,9
subgraph, 5
subnetwork, 178
subnetwork isomorphism, 178
substitution matrix, 15,20
subtree prune and regraft, 38,277
subtree reduction, 278
subtree rooted at v,8
sum of pairs, 20
super split network, 73,271
super tree, LSA, 143
super tree, strict consensus, 271
super-tree method, 143
suppress a node, 5
suppressible node, 5,139, 197
T-Rex algorithm, 261
T-Rex, software, 75,337
T-theory, 122
tangled clusters, 195, 199
taxon labeling, 25
TBR, 39
TBR distance, 62
TCS, software, 75,249, 334
temporal feasibility, 298
three dimensional matching problem,
132
three-point condition, 52
tight span, 123
time consistent, 167
time reversible model, 40
time stamp, 167
top-down algorithm, 11
topological embedding, rooted tree, 313
topological embedding, split network,
190
transfer edge, 81,327
transfer view, 81,82,327
transitions, 15,31,217
transversions, 15,31,217
tree, 7tree bisection and reconnection, 39
tree cycle, 162
tree distance, 51
tree edge, 134, 139
tree length, 51
tree node, 134, 139
tree of life, 11
tree traversals, 9
tree, phylogenetic, 25
tree, rooted phylogenetic, 26
tree-child, 164
tree-like distances, 51
tree-sibling, 166
Treemapper, software, 299, 337
triangular cladogram, tree, 313
tripartition, 175
tripartition distance, 175
trivial cluster, 128
trivial split, 88
ultra metric, 52
UMP method, 335
undirected graph, 3
undirected path, 5
uniqueness, cluster networks, 135
unnormalized Hamming distance, 50
unrooted phylogenetic network, 71
unrooted tree, 7
unrooted tree, phylogenetic, 25
unstable ancestor, 175
unstable descendant, 175
unweighted split metric, 250
vertex, 7
virtual median, 226
visibility property, 165
weak compatibility, 106
weakly connected, 6
weight, cluster, 128
weight, edge, 26
weight, split, 88
weighted least squares approach, 60
weighted split metric, 250
χ-tree, 25
Z-closure, 269, 332, 335
Z-relation, 268